Angela Merkel
'Angela Dorothea Merkel' (née 'Kasner'; born 17 July 1954) is a German politician and the current  Chancellor of Germany . She is also the leader of the  Christian Democratic Union  (CDU). A former  research scientist  with a doctorate in  physical chemistry , Merkel entered politics in the wake of the  Revolutions of 1989 , and briefly served as a deputy spokesperson for the first democratically-elected  East German Government  headed by  Lothar de Maizière  in 1990. Following  German reunification  in 1990, Merkel was elected to the  Bundestag  for the state of  Mecklenburg-Vorpommern , and has been reelected ever since. Merkel was appointed as the  Minister for Women and Youth  in the  federal government  under  Chancellor   Helmut Kohl  in 1991, and became the  Minister for the Environment  in 1994. After her party lost the  federal election in 1998 , Merkel was elected  Secretary-General  of the CDU before becoming the party's first woman leader two years later in the aftermath of a  donations scandal  that toppled  Wolfgang Schäuble . Following the  2005 federal election , Merkel was appointed Germany's first woman Chancellor at the head of a  grand coalition  consisting of the CDU, its Bavarian sister party, the  Christian Social Union  (CSU), and the  Social Democratic Party of Germany  (SPD). In the  2009 federal election , the CDU obtained the largest share of the vote and Merkel was able to form a coalition government with the support of the  Free Democratic Party  (FDP). At the  2013 federal election , Merkel won a landslide victory with 41.5% of the vote, falling just short of an overall majority, and formed a second grand coalition with the SPD, after the FDP lost all of its representation in the  Bundestag . In 2007, Merkel was  President of the European Council  and chaired the  G8 , the second woman to do so. Merkel played a central role in the negotiation of the  Treaty of Lisbon  and the  Berlin Declaration . One of Merkel's consistent priorities has been to strengthen transatlantic economic relations. Merkel played a crucial role in managing the  financial crisis  at the European and international level, and she has been referred to as "the decider." In domestic policy,  health care reform , problems concerning future  energy development  and more recently her government's approach to the ongoing  migrant crisis  have been major issues during her Chancellorship. Merkel has been widely described as the de facto leader of the  European Union  throughout her tenure as Chancellor. Merkel has twice been named  the world's second most powerful person  by  Forbes  magazine, the highest ranking ever achieved by a woman. In December 2015, Merkel was named as Time magazine's  Person of the Year , with the magazine's cover declaring her to be the " Chancellor of the Free World ." On 26 March 2014, Merkel became the longest-serving incumbent  head of government  in the  European Union  and she is currently the  [senior G7](List of longest-serving G8 leaders)  leader. In May 2016, Merkel was named the  most powerful woman  in the world for a record tenth time by Forbes. On 20 November 2016, Merkel announced she would seek re-election to a fourth term.

Merkel was born Angela Dorothea Kasner in 1954, in  Hamburg , West Germany, the daughter of  Horst Kasner  (1926–2011; né Kaźmierczak), a Lutheran pastor and a native of Berlin, and his wife Herlind (née Jentzsch), born in 1928 in  Danzig  (now  Gdańsk , Poland), a teacher of English and  Latin . She has two younger siblings, her brother  Marcus Kasner , a physicist, and her sister Irene Kasner, an occupational therapist. In her childhood and youth, Merkel was known among her peers by the nickname "Kasi," derived from her last name Kasner. Angela Merkel is of Polish and German descent. Her paternal grandfather  Ludwik Marian Kaźmierczak  was a German policeman of Polish ethnicity, who had taken part in Poland's struggle for independence. He married Merkel's grandmother Margarethe, a German girl from Berlin, and relocated to her hometown where he worked in the police. In 1930 they Germanized the Polish name Kaźmierczak to Kasner. Merkel's maternal grandparents were the Danzig politician  Willi Jentzsch  and Gertrud Alma née Drange, a daughter of the  city clerk  of  Elbing  (now  Elbląg , Poland)  Emil Drange . Merkel has mentioned her Polish heritage on several occasions, but her Polish roots became better known as a result of a 2013 biography. Religion played a key role in the Kasner family's migration from West Germany to East Germany. Her father was born a Catholic, but the Kasner family eventually converted to Lutheranism, and he studied Lutheran theology in  Heidelberg  and afterwards in Hamburg. In 1954, Angela's father received a pastorate at the church in  Quitzow  (a quarter of  Perleberg  in Brandenburg), which was then in  East Germany , and so the family moved to  Templin . Merkel thus grew up in the countryside 80 km north of  East Berlin . Like most young people in the  German Democratic Republic  (East Germany), Merkel was a member of the  Free German Youth (FDJ) , the official youth movement sponsored by the ruling  Socialist Unity Party . Membership was nominally voluntary, but those who did not join found it all but impossible to gain admission to higher education. She did not participate in the secular  coming of age  ceremony  Jugendweihe , however, which was common in East Germany. Instead, she was  confirmed . Later, at the Academy of Sciences, she became a member of the FDJ district board and secretary for " Agitprop " (Agitation and Propaganda). Merkel claimed that she was secretary for culture. When Merkel's one-time FDJ district chairman contradicted her, she insisted that: "According to my memory, I was secretary for culture. But what do I know? I believe I won't know anything when I'm 80." Merkel's progress in the compulsory Marxism–Leninism course was graded only genügend (sufficient, passing grade) in 1983 and 1986. At school, she learned to speak Russian fluently, and was awarded prizes for her proficiency in Russian and Mathematics. Merkel was educated in Templin and at the  University of Leipzig , where she studied  physics  from 1973 to 1978. While a student, she participated in the reconstruction of the ruin of the  Moritzbastei , a project students initiated to create their own club and recreation facility on campus. Such an initiative was unprecedented in the  GDR  of that period, and initially resisted by the  University of Leipzig ; however, with backing of the local leadership of the  SED  party, the project was allowed to proceed. Merkel worked and studied at the Central Institute for  Physical chemistry  of the  Academy of Sciences  in  Berlin-Adlershof  from 1978 to 1990. After being awarded a doctorate ( Dr. rer. nat. ) for her thesis on  quantum chemistry , she worked as a researcher and published several papers. In 1989, Merkel got involved in the growing democracy movement after the  fall of the Berlin Wall , joining the new party  Democratic Awakening . Following the  first (and only) multi-party election  of the East German state, she became the deputy spokesperson of the new pre- unification  caretaker government under  Lothar de Maizière . In April 1990, the Democratic Awakening merged with the  East German CDU , which in turn merged with its western counterpart after reunification.

Merkel stood for election at the  1990 federal election , the first since reunification, and was elected to the  Bundestag  for the constituency of  Stralsund – Nordvorpommern – Rügen , which is in the  district  of  Vorpommern-Rügen . She has won re-election for this constituency at the six federal elections since. After her first election, she was almost immediately appointed to the  Cabinet , serving as  Minister for Women and Youth  under  Chancellor   Helmut Kohl . In 1994, she was promoted to becoming  Minister for the Environment and Nuclear Safety , which gave her greater political visibility and a platform from which to build her political career. As one of Kohl's protégées and his youngest Cabinet Minister, she was frequently referred to by Kohl as "mein Mädchen" ("my girl").

After the  Kohl Government  was  defeated at the 1998 election , Merkel was appointed Secretary-General of the  CDU , a key position as the party was no longer part of the federal government. Merkel oversaw a string of CDU election victories in six out of seven state elections in 1999, breaking the long-standing SPD-Green hold on the  Bundesrat . Following a  party funding scandal  that compromised many leading figures of the CDU—including Kohl himself and his successor as CDU Leader,  Wolfgang Schäuble , Merkel criticised her former mentor publicly and advocated a fresh start for the party without him. She was subsequently elected to replace Schäuble, becoming the first female leader of a German party on 10 April 2000. Her election surprised many observers, as her personality offered a contrast to the party she had been elected to lead; Merkel is a  centrist   Protestant  originating from predominantly Protestant northern Germany, while the CDU is a male-dominated,  socially conservative  party with strongholds in western and southern Germany, and its Bavarian sister party, the CSU, has deep Catholic roots. Following Merkel's election as CDU Leader, she enjoyed considerable popularity among the German population and polls indicated that many Germans would like to see her become  Chancellor   Gerhard Schröder 's main challenger in the  2002 election . However, she was subsequently outmaneuvered politically by CSU Leader  Edmund Stoiber , to whom she eventually ceded the privilege of challenging Schröder. He went on to squander a large lead in opinion polls to lose the election by a razor-thin margin. After Stoiber's defeat in 2002, in addition to her role as CDU Leader, Merkel became Leader of the Opposition in the  Bundestag ;  Friedrich Merz , who had held the post prior to the 2002 election, was eased out to make way for Merkel. Merkel supported a substantial  reform  agenda concerning Germany's economic and social system, and was considered more pro-market than her own party (the CDU). She advocated German labour law changes, specifically removing barriers to laying off employees and increasing the allowed number of work hours in a week. She argued that existing laws made the country less competitive, because companies cannot easily control labour costs when business is slow. Merkel argued that Germany should phase out  nuclear power  less quickly than the Schröder administration had planned. Merkel advocated a strong transatlantic partnership and German-American friendship. In the spring of 2003, defying strong public opposition, Merkel came out in favour of the  U. S. invasion of Iraq , describing it as "unavoidable" and accusing Chancellor  Gerhard Schröder  of  anti-Americanism . She criticised the government's support for the  accession of Turkey to the European Union  and favoured a " privileged partnership " instead. In doing so, she reflected public opinion that grew more hostile toward Turkish membership of the European Union. On 30 May 2005, Merkel won the CDU/CSU nomination as challenger to Chancellor  Gerhard Schröder  of the  SPD  in the  2005 national elections . Her party began the campaign with a 21-point lead over the  SPD  in national opinion polls, although her personal popularity lagged behind that of the incumbent. However, the CDU/CSU campaign suffered when Merkel, having made economic competence central to the CDU's platform, confused  gross  and  net income  twice during a televised debate. She regained some momentum after she announced that she would appoint  Paul Kirchhof , a former judge at the German Constitutional Court and leading fiscal policy expert, as Minister of Finance. Merkel and the CDU lost ground after Kirchhof proposed the introduction of a  flat tax  in Germany, again undermining the party's broad appeal on economic affairs and convincing many voters that the CDU's platform of deregulation was designed to benefit only the rich. This was compounded by Merkel's proposing to increase  VAT  to reduce Germany's deficit and fill the gap in revenue from a flat tax. The SPD were able to increase their support simply by pledging not to introduce flat taxes or increase VAT. Although Merkel's standing recovered after she distanced herself from Kirchhof's proposals, she remained considerably less popular than Schröder, and the CDU's lead was down to 9% on the eve of the election. On 18 September 2005, Merkel's CDU/CSU and Schröder's SPD went head-to-head in the national elections, with the CDU/CSU winning 35.3% (CDU 27.8%/CSU 7.5%) of the second votes to the SPD's 34.2%. Neither the SPD-Green coalition nor the CDU/CSU and its preferred coalition partners, the  Free Democratic Party , held enough seats to form a majority in the Bundestag, and both Schröder and Merkel claimed victory. A  grand coalition  between the CDU/CSU and SPD faced the challenge that both parties demanded the chancellorship. However, after three weeks of  negotiations , the two parties reached a deal whereby Merkel would become Chancellor and the SPD would hold 8 of the 16 seats in the cabinet. The coalition deal was approved by both parties at party conferences on 14 November 2005. Merkel was elected Chancellor by the majority of delegates (397 to 217) in the newly assembled Bundestag on 22 November 2005, but 51 members of the governing coalition voted against her. Reports had indicated that the grand coalition would pursue a mix of policies, some of which differ from Merkel's political platform as leader of the opposition and candidate for Chancellor. The coalition's intent was to cut public spending whilst increasing  VAT  (from 16 to 19%),  social insurance  contributions and the top rate of  income tax . Merkel had stated that the main aim of her government would be to reduce unemployment, and that it is this issue on which her government will be judged.

On 22 November 2005, Merkel assumed the office of Chancellor of Germany following a  stalemate election  that resulted in a  grand coalition  with the  SPD . Her party was  re-elected in 2009  with an increased number of seats, and could form a governing coalition with the  FDP . In the  election of September 2013  the CDU/CSU parties emerged as winners, but formed another grand coalition with the SPD due to the FDP's failure to obtain the minimum of 5% of votes required to enter parliament. 

In October 2010, Merkel told a meeting of younger members of her conservative Christian Democratic Union (CDU) party at  Potsdam  that attempts to build a multicultural society in Germany had "utterly failed", stating that: "The concept that we are now living side by side and are happy about it" does not work and "we feel attached to the Christian concept of mankind, that is what defines us. Anyone who doesn't accept that is in the wrong place here." She continued to say that immigrants should integrate and adopt Germany's culture and values. This has added to a growing debate within Germany on the levels of immigration, its effect on Germany and the degree to which Muslim immigrants have integrated into German society.

On 25 September 2007, Merkel met the  14th Dalai Lama  for "private and informal talks" in the  Chancellery  in Berlin amid protest from China. China afterwards cancelled separate talks with German officials, including talks with Justice Minister  Brigitte Zypries . One of Merkel's priorities was strengthening transatlantic economic relations – she signed the agreement for the Transatlantic Economic Council on 30 April 2007 at the White House. The Council, co-chaired by an EU and a US official, aims at removing barriers to trade in a further integrated transatlantic free-trade area. This project has been described as ultra-liberal by the French left-wing politician  Jean-Luc Mélenchon , fearing a transfer of sovereignty from citizens to multinationals and an alignment of the European Union on the American foreign policy and institutions. Der Spiegel  reported that tensions between Chancellor Merkel and President Barack Obama eased during a meeting between the two leaders in June 2009. Commenting on a White House press conference held after the meeting, Der Spiegel stated, "Of course the rather more reserved chancellor couldn't really keep up with [Obama's]...  charm offensive ," but to reciprocate for Obama's "good natured" diplomacy, "she gave it a go... by mentioning the experiences of Obama's sister in Heidelberg, making it clear that she had read his autobiography". In 2006 Merkel expressed concern about  overreliance on Russian energy , but she received little support from others in Berlin. Merkel favors the  Association Agreement  between  Ukraine  and the  European Union ; but stated in December 2012 that its implementation depends on reforms in Ukraine. Merkel has visited  Israel  four times. On 16 March 2008, Merkel arrived in Israel to mark the 60th  anniversary of the Jewish state . She was greeted at the airport by Prime Minister  Ehud Olmert , an honor guard and many of the country's political and religious leaders, including most of the Israeli Cabinet. Until then, US President  George W. Bush  had been the only world leader Olmert had honored by greeting at the airport. Merkel spoke before  Israel's parliament , the only foreigner who was not a head of state to have done so, but this provoked rumbles of opposition from Israeli MPs on the far right. At the time, Merkel was also both the  President of the European Council  and the chair of the  G8 . Merkel has supported Israeli diplomatic initiatives, opposing the Palestinian bid for membership at the UN. However, Merkel requested that continued building of settlements beyond the Green Line should stop, and disagreed with the Israeli government's behavior. Merkel's latest visit to Israel was on 25–27 February 2014. During her visit, Merkel was awarded Israel's highest civilian award by President Shimon Peres, for her "unwavering commitment to Israel's security and the fight against anti-Semitism and racism." Merkel expressed support for Israel's right to defend itself during the  2014 Israel–Gaza conflict . Merkel and Indian Prime Minister  Manmohan Singh  made a "Joint Declaration" emphasising the Indo-German strategic partnership in 2006. It turned the focus of future cooperation onto the fields of energy, science and technology, and defence. A similar Declaration, signed during Merkel's visit to India in 2007, noted the substantial progress made in  Indo-German relations  and set ambitious goals for their development in the future. In recognition of the importance of  China  to the German economy, by 2014 Merkel had led seven trade delegations to China since assuming office in 2005. The same year, in March, China's President  Xi Jinping  visited Germany. In  2015 , with the absence of  Stephen Harper , Merkel became the only leader to have attended every  G20  meeting since the very first in  2008 , having been present at a record  [eleven summits](List of G20 summits)  as of  2016 . She is expected to host the  2017 G20 Hamburg summit . In 2016, following the election of  Donald Trump  to the U. S. presidency, Merkel was described by  The New York Times  as "the Liberal West's Last Defender" and by  Timothy Garton Ash  as "the  leader of the free world ." U. S. President  Barack Obama  described her in 2016 as his "closest international partner" throughout his tenure as President.

Following  major falls in worldwide stock markets in September 2008 , the German government stepped in to assist the  mortgage  company  Hypo Real Estate  with a bailout, which was agreed on 6 October, with German banks to contribute €30 billion and the  Bundesbank  €20 billion to a credit line. On 4 October 2008, a Saturday, following the  Irish Government's  decision to guarantee all deposits in private savings accounts, a move she strongly criticised, Merkel said there were no plans for the German Government to do the same. The following day, Merkel stated that the government would guarantee private savings account deposits, after all. However, two days later, on 6 October 2008, it emerged that the pledge was simply a political move that would not be backed by legislation.  Other European governments eventually either raised the limits or promised to guarantee savings in full.

At the  World Economic Forum  in Davos, 2013, she started to say that Europe nowadays has only 7% of the global population and produces only 25% of the global GDP, but that it spends almost 50% of the global social expenditure. The solution to the economic ills of the continent only can consist in raising its competitiveness. Since then, this comparison has become a central element in major speeches. The international financial press has widely commented on her thesis, with The Economist saying that:adding that:The  Financial Times  commented:

In 2015, an open letter for which the  ONE Campaign  had collected signatures was addressed to Merkel and  Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma , urging them to focus on women and girls when addressing international efforts to combat hunger and misery, which the letter contended is disproportionately suffered by females. The letter was addressed to Merkel and Dlamini-Zuma because they serve as the head of the G7 in Germany and the AU in South Africa respectively, which will set priorities in development funding before a main UN summit in September 2015 that will establish new development goals for the generation.

Midway through her second term, Merkel's approval plummeted in Germany, resulting in heavy losses in state elections for her party. An August 2011 poll found her coalition had only 36% support compared to a rival potential coalition's 51%. However, she scored well on her handling of the recent euro crisis (69% rated her performance as good rather than poor), and her approval rating reached an all-time high of 77% in February 2012 and again in July 2014. Merkel's approval rating dropped to 54% in October 2015, during the  European migrant crisis , the lowest since 2011. According to a poll conducted after  [terror attacks](List of Islamist terrorist attacks)  in Germany Merkel's approval rating dropped to 47% (August 2016). Half of Germans did not want her to serve a fourth term in office compared to 42% in favor. However, according to a poll taken in October 2016, her approval rating had been found to have risen again, 54% of Germans were found to be satifsfied with work of Merkel as Chancellor. According to another poll taken in November 2016, 59% were to found to be in favour of a renewed Chancellor candidature of Merkel in 2017.

The  first Cabinet of Angela Merkel  was sworn in at 16:00  CET  on 22 November 2005. On 31 October 2005, after the defeat of his favoured candidate for the position of Secretary General of the SPD,  Franz Müntefering  indicated that he would resign as party chairman, which he did in November. Ostensibly responding to this,  Edmund Stoiber  (CSU), who was originally nominated as Minister for Economics and Technology, announced his withdrawal on 1 November 2005. While this was initially seen as a blow to Merkel's attempt at forming a viable coalition, the manner in which Stoiber withdrew earned him much ridicule and severely undermined his position as a Merkel rival. Separate conferences of the CDU, CSU, and SPD approved the proposed Cabinet on 14 November 2005. The  second Cabinet of Angela Merkel  was sworn in on 28 October 2009. In 2013, Merkel won one of the most decisive victories in German history, achieving the best result for the CDU/CSU since reunification and coming within five seats of the first absolute majority in the Bundestag since 1957. However, with their preferred coalition partner, the FDP, failing to enter parliament for the first time since 1949, the CDU/CSU turned to the SPD to form the third  grand coalition  in postwar German history and the second under Merkel's leadership. The  third Cabinet of Angela Merkel  was sworn in on 17 December 2013. At the beginning of August 2015, Der Spiegel reported that Merkel had "evidently decided to run again in 2017".

In 1977 at the age of 23, Angela Kasner married physics student Ulrich Merkel and took his surname. The marriage ended in divorce in 1982. Her second and current husband is quantum chemist and professor  Joachim Sauer , who has largely remained out of the media spotlight. They first met in 1981, became a couple later and married privately on 30 December 1998. She has no children, but Sauer has two adult sons from a previous marriage. She is a fervent  football  fan and has been known to listen to games while in the Bundestag and to attend games of the  national team  in her official capacity. On 6 January 2014, Merkel fractured a bone in her pelvis in a  cross-country skiing  accident in  Switzerland . Merkel has a fear of dogs after being attacked by one in 1995. Vladimir Putin brought in his pet Labrador during a press conference in 2007. Putin claims he did not mean to scare her, though Merkel later observed, "I understand why he has to do this -- to prove he's a man. ... He's afraid of his own weakness."

Angela Merkel is a  Lutheran  member of the  Evangelical Church in Berlin, Brandenburg and Silesian Upper Lusatia  (), a  United   Protestant  (i.e. both  Reformed  and Lutheran)  church body  under the umbrella of the  Evangelical Church in Germany  (EKD). The EKBO is a church of the  Prussian Union . Before the 2004 merger of the Evangelical Church in Berlin-Brandenburg and the Evangelical Church in Silesian Upper Lusatia (both also being a part of the EKD), she belonged to the former.

As a female politician from a centre right party who is also a scientist, Merkel has been compared by many in the English-language press to former British Prime Minister  Margaret Thatcher . Some have referred to her as "Iron Lady", "Iron Girl", and even "The Iron Frau" (all alluding to Thatcher, whose nickname was "The Iron Lady"—Thatcher also had a science degree from Oxford University in chemistry). Political commentators have debated the precise extent to which their agendas are similar. Later in her tenure, Merkel acquired the nickname "Mutti" (a German familiar form of "mother"), said by  Der Spiegel  to refer to an idealised mother figure from the 1950s and 1960s. She has also been called the "Iron Chancellor", in reference to  Otto von Bismarck . In addition to being the first female German chancellor, the first to have grown up in the former East Germany (though she was born in the West), and the youngest German chancellor since the Second World War, Merkel is also the first born after World War II, and the first chancellor of the Federal Republic with a background in natural sciences. She studied physics; her predecessors studied law, business or history or were military officers, among others.

Merkel has been criticised for being personally present and involved at the M100 Media Award handover to Danish cartoonist  Kurt Westergaard , who had triggered the  Muhammad cartoons controversy . This happened at a time of fierce emotional debate in Germany over a book by the former  Deutsche Bundesbank  executive and finance senator of Berlin  Thilo Sarrazin , which was critical of the Muslim immigration. At the same time she condemned a planned burning of Korans by a fundamental pastor in Florida. The  Central Council of Muslims in Germany  and the Left Party ( Die Linke ) as well as the  German Green Party  criticised the action by the centre-right chancellor. The  Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung  newspaper wrote: "This will probably be the most explosive moment of her chancellorship so far." Others have praised Merkel and called it a brave and bold move for the cause of freedom of speech. Merkel's position towards the negative statements by  Thilo Sarrazin  with regard to the integration problems with Arab and Turkish people in Germany has been critical throughout. According to her personal statements, Sarrazin's approach is "totally unacceptable" and counterproductive to the ongoing problems of integration. Members of her cabinet and Merkel herself also support state schools enabling  Islam ic religious instruction (similar to the provision of denominational Christian religious instruction). The term alternativlos (German for "without an alternative"), which was frequently used by Angela Merkel to describe her measures addressing the  European sovereign-debt crisis , was named the  Un-word of the Year 2010  by a jury of linguistic scholars. The wording was criticised as undemocratic, as any discussion on Merkel's politics would thus be deemed unnecessary or undesirable. The expression is credited for the name of the political party  Alternative for Germany , which was founded in 2013. Her trademark  Merkel-Raute  has been described as "probably one of the most recognisable hand gestures in the world". Its  political symbolism  received mixed reviews, ranging from being prominently used by the CDU during the  2013 election  campaign, to accusations of a  cult of personality  that were brought forth by her opponents. In July 2013, Merkel defended the  surveillance practices  of the  NSA , and described the United States as "our truest ally throughout the decades". During a visit of U. S. President Barack Obama in Berlin, Merkel said on 19 June 2013 in the context of the  2013 mass surveillance disclosures : "The Internet is uncharted territory for us all". (Das Internet ist Neuland für uns alle.) This statement led to various  internet memes  and online mockery of Merkel. Merkel has compared the NSA to the  Stasi  when it became known that her mobile phone was tapped by that agency. In response  Susan Rice  pledged that the USA will desist from spying on her personally, but said there would not be a no-espionage agreement between the two countries. On 18 July 2014 Merkel said trust between Germany and the United States could only be restored by talks between the two, and she would seek to have talks. She reiterated the U. S. remained Germany's most important ally. In August 2014, Merkel visited  Ukraine  to show her support for Ukrainian President  Petro Poroshenko .  Human Rights Watch  said that "Merkel's visit is an opportunity for her to denounce violations of international humanitarian law by the Ukrainian military."Her statement "Islam is part of Germany" during a state visit of the Turkish prime minister  Ahmet Davutoğlu  in January 2015 induced criticism within her party. The  parliamentary group leader   Volker Kauder  said that Islam is not part of Germany and that Muslims should deliberate on the question why so many violent people refer to the  Quran . In October 2015,  Horst Seehofer , Bavarian State Premier and leader of  CSU , the sister party of Merkel's  CDU , criticised Merkel's policy of allowing in  hundreds of thousands of migrants from the Middle East : "We're now in a state of mind without rules, without system and without order because of a German decision." Seehofer attacked Merkel policies in sharp language, threatened to sue the government in the high court, and hinted that the CSU might topple Merkel. Many MPs of Merkel's CDU party also voices dissatisfaction with Merkel. Chancellor Merkel insisted that Germany has the economic strength to cope with the influx of migrants and reiterated that there is no legal maximum limit on the number of migrants Germany can take.

Merkel features as a main character in two of the three plays that make up the Europeans Trilogy ("Bruges", "Antwerp", "Tervuren") by Paris-based UK playwright  Nick Awde : "Bruges" ( Edinburgh Festival , 2014) and "Tervuren" (2016). A character named Merkel, accompanied by a sidekick called  Schäuble , also appears as the sinister female henchman in  Michael Paraskos 's novel In Search of Sixpence.