Apple
The 'apple tree' (Malus pumila, commonly and erroneously called Malus domestica) is a  deciduous   tree  in the  rose family  best known for its sweet,  pomaceous   fruit , the 'apple'. It is  cultivated  worldwide as a  fruit tree , and is the most widely grown species in the  genus   Malus . The tree originated in  Central Asia , where its wild ancestor,  Malus sieversii , is still found today. Apples have been grown for thousands of years in Asia and Europe, and were brought to North America by European colonists. Apples have  religious  and  mythological  significance in many cultures, including  Norse ,  Greek  and European Christian traditions. Apple trees are large if grown from seed.  Generally apple varieties are propagated by  grafting  onto rootstocks, which control the size of the resulting tree. There are more than 7,500 known  [cultivars of apples](List of apple cultivars) , resulting in a range of desired characteristics. Different cultivars are bred for various tastes and uses, including  cooking , eating raw and  cider  production. Trees and fruit are prone to a number of  fungal ,  bacteria l and pest problems, which can be controlled by a number of  organic  and non-organic means. In 2010, the fruit's  genome  was  sequenced  as part of research on disease control and selective breeding in apple production. Worldwide production of apples in 2013 was 80.8 million  tonnes , with China accounting for 49% of the total. 

The apple is a  deciduous  tree, generally standing 6 to tall in cultivation and up to 12 m in the wild. When cultivated, the size, shape and branch density are determined by  rootstock  selection and trimming method. The  leaves  are  alternately arranged  dark green-colored simple ovals with serrated margins and slightly downy undersides.  though pink or yellow flesh is also known.

The original wild  ancestor  of Malus pumila was Malus sieversii, found growing wild in the mountains of Central Asia in southern Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and  Xinjiang , China.  Cultivation of the species, most likely beginning on the forested flanks of the  Tian Shan  mountains, progressed over a long period of time and permitted secondary  introgression  of genes from other species into the open-pollinated seeds. Significant exchange with  Malus sylvestris , the crabapple, resulted in current populations of apples being more related to crabapples than to the more morphologically similar progenitor Malus sieversii. In strains without recent admixture the contribution of the latter predominates.

In 2010, an Italian-led consortium announced they had sequenced the complete  genome  of the apple in collaboration with horticultural genomicists at  Washington State University , using the  Golden delicious  variety. It had about 57,000 genes, the highest number of any plant genome studied to date and more genes than the human genome (about 30,000). This new understanding of the apple genome will help scientists in identifying genes and gene variants that contribute to resistance to disease and drought, and other desirable characteristics. Understanding the genes behind these characteristics will allow scientists to perform more knowledgeable selective breeding. The genome sequence also provided proof that Malus sieversii was the wild ancestor of the domestic apple—an issue that had been long-debated in the scientific community.

The center of diversity of the genus  Malus  is in eastern present-day  Turkey . The apple tree was perhaps the earliest tree to be cultivated, Until the 20th century, farmers stored apples in  frostproof cellars  during the winter for their own use or for sale. Improved transportation of fresh apples by train and road replaced the necessity for storage. In the 21st century, long-term storage again came into popularity, as "controlled atmosphere" facilities were used to keep apples fresh year-round. Controlled atmosphere facilities use high humidity, low oxygen, and controlled carbon dioxide levels to maintain fruit freshness.

In  Norse mythology , the goddess  Iðunn  is portrayed in the  Prose Edda  (written in the 13th century by  Snorri Sturluson ) as providing apples to the  gods  that give them  eternal youth fulness. English scholar  H. R. Ellis Davidson  links apples to religious practices in  Germanic paganism , from which  Norse paganism  developed. She points out that buckets of apples were found in the  Oseberg ship  burial site in Norway, and that fruit and nuts (Iðunn having been described as being transformed into a nut in  Skáldskaparmál ) have been found in the early graves of the  Germanic peoples  in England and elsewhere on the continent of Europe, which may have had a symbolic meaning, and that nuts are still a recognized symbol of  fertility  in southwest England. Davidson notes a connection between apples and the  Vanir , a tribe of gods associated with  fertility  in Norse mythology, citing an instance of eleven "golden apples" being given to woo the beautiful  Gerðr  by  Skírnir , who was acting as messenger for the major Vanir god  Freyr  in stanzas 19 and 20 of  Skírnismál . Davidson also notes a further connection between fertility and apples in Norse mythology in chapter 2 of the  Völsunga saga  when the major goddess  Frigg  sends King  Rerir  an apple after he prays to Odin for a child, Frigg's messenger (in the guise of a crow) drops the apple in his lap as he sits atop a  mound . Rerir's wife's consumption of the apple results in a six-year pregnancy and the  Caesarean section  birth of their son—the hero  Völsung . Further, Davidson points out the "strange" phrase "Apples of  Hel " used in an 11th-century poem by the  skald  Thorbiorn Brúnarson. She states this may imply that the apple was thought of by Brúnarson as the food of the dead. Further, Davidson notes that the potentially Germanic goddess  Nehalennia  is sometimes depicted with apples and that parallels exist in early Irish stories. Davidson asserts that while cultivation of the apple in Northern Europe extends back to at least the time of the  Roman Empire  and came to Europe from the  Near East , the native varieties of apple trees growing in Northern Europe are small and bitter. Davidson concludes that in the figure of Iðunn "we must have a dim reflection of an old symbol: that of the guardian goddess of the life-giving fruit of the other world."

Apples appear in many  religious traditions , often as a mystical or  forbidden fruit . One of the problems identifying apples in religion,  mythology  and  folktales  is that the word "apple" was used as a generic term for all (foreign) fruit, other than berries, including nuts, as late as the 17th century. For instance, in  Greek mythology , the  Greek hero   Heracles , as a part of his  Twelve Labours , was required to travel to the Garden of the Hesperides and pick the golden apples off the  Tree of Life  growing at its center. The Greek goddess of discord,  Eris , became disgruntled after she was excluded from the wedding of  Peleus  and  Thetis . In retaliation, she tossed a golden apple inscribed  Καλλίστη  (Kalliste, sometimes transliterated Kallisti, 'For the most beautiful one'), into the wedding party. Three goddesses claimed the apple:  Hera ,  Athena , and  Aphrodite .  Paris  of  Troy  was appointed to select the recipient. After being bribed by both Hera and Athena, Aphrodite tempted him with the most beautiful woman in the world,  Helen  of  Sparta . He awarded the apple to Aphrodite, thus indirectly causing the  Trojan War . The apple was thus considered, in ancient Greece, to be sacred to Aphrodite, and to throw an apple at someone was to symbolically declare one's love; and similarly, to catch it was to symbolically show one's acceptance of that love. An epigram claiming authorship by Plato states:Atalanta , also of Greek mythology, raced all her suitors in an attempt to avoid marriage. She outran all but  Hippomenes  (also known as  Melanion , a name possibly derived from melon the Greek word for both "apple" and fruit in general), 

Though the forbidden fruit of  Eden  in the  Book of Genesis  is not identified, popular Christian tradition has held that it was an apple that  Eve  coaxed  Adam  to share with her. The origin of the popular identification with a fruit unknown in the Middle East in biblical times is found in confusion between the  Latin  words mālum (an apple) and mălum (an evil), each of which is normally written malum. The tree of the forbidden fruit is called "the tree of the knowledge of good and evil" in , and the Latin for "good and evil" is bonum et malum. Renaissance  painters may also have been influenced by the story of the  golden apple s in the  Garden of Hesperides . As a result, in the story of Adam and Eve, the apple became a symbol for knowledge, immortality, temptation, the fall of man into sin, and sin itself. The  larynx  in the human throat has been called the " Adam's apple " because of a notion that it was caused by the forbidden fruit remaining in the throat of Adam. The apple as symbol of sexual  seduction  has been used to imply human sexuality, possibly in an ironic vein. 

There are more than 7,500 known  cultivar s of apples. Cultivars vary in their  yield  and the ultimate size of the tree, even when grown on the same  rootstock . Old cultivars are often oddly shaped, russeted, and have a variety of textures and colors. Some find them to have a better flavor than modern cultivars, but they may have other problems which make them commercially unviable—low yield, disease susceptibility, poor tolerance for storage or transport, or just being the 'wrong' size. A few old cultivars are still produced on a large scale, but many have been preserved by home gardeners and farmers that sell directly to local markets. Many unusual and locally important cultivars with their own unique taste and appearance exist; apple conservation campaigns have sprung up around the world to preserve such local cultivars from extinction. In the United Kingdom, old cultivars such as ' Cox's Orange Pippin ' and ' Egremont Russet ' are still commercially important even though by modern standards they are low yielding and susceptible to disease.

In the wild, apples grow readily from seeds. However, like most perennial fruits, apples are ordinarily propagated asexually by  grafting . This is because seedling apples are an example of " extreme heterozygotes ", in that rather than inheriting DNA from their parents to create a new apple with those characteristics, they are instead significantly different from their parents.  Triploid  varieties have an additional reproductive barrier in that 3 sets of chromosomes cannot be divided evenly during meiosis, yielding unequal segregation of the chromosomes (aneuploids). Even in the case when a triploid plant can produce a seed (apples are an example), it occurs infrequently, and seedlings rarely survive. Because apples do not breed true when planted as seeds,  grafting  is generally used to produce new apple trees. The  rootstock  used for the bottom of the graft can be selected to produce trees of a large variety of sizes, as well as changing the winter hardiness, insect and disease resistance, and soil preference of the resulting tree. Dwarf rootstocks can be used to produce very small trees (less than 10 ft high at maturity), which bear fruit earlier in their life cycle than full size trees. Dwarf rootstocks for apple trees can be traced as far back as 300 BC, to the area of  Persia  and  Asia Minor .  Alexander the Great  sent samples of dwarf apple trees to  Aristotle 's  Lyceum . Dwarf rootstocks became common by the 15th century, and later went through several cycles of popularity and decline throughout the world. The majority of the rootstocks used today to control size in apples were developed in England in the early 1900s. The  East Malling Research Station  conducted extensive research into rootstocks, and today their rootstocks are given an "M" prefix to designate their origin. Rootstocks marked with an "MM" prefix are Malling-series varieties later crossed with trees of the  Northern Spy  variety in  Merton, England . Most new apple cultivars originate as seedlings, which either arise by chance or are bred by deliberately crossing cultivars with promising characteristics. The words 'seedling', 'pippin', and 'kernel' in the name of an apple cultivar suggest that it originated as a seedling. Apples can also form  bud sport s (mutations on a single branch). Some bud sports turn out to be improved strains of the parent cultivar. Some differ sufficiently from the parent tree to be considered new cultivars. Since the 1930s, the Excelsior Experiment Station at the  University of Minnesota  has introduced a steady progression of important apples that are widely grown, both commercially and by local orchardists, throughout  Minnesota  and  Wisconsin . Its most important contributions have included ' Haralson'  (which is the most widely cultivated apple in Minnesota), ' Wealthy ', 'Honeygold', and ' Honeycrisp '. Apples have been acclimatized in Ecuador at very high altitudes, where they can often, with the needed factors, provide crops twice per year because of constant temperate conditions year-round.

Apples are self-incompatible; they must  cross-pollinate  to develop fruit. During the flowering each season, apple growers often utilize  pollinator s to carry pollen.  Honey bee s are most commonly used.  Orchard mason bees  are also used as supplemental pollinators in commercial orchards.  Bumblebee   queens  are sometimes present in orchards, but not usually in enough quantity to be significant pollinators. There are four to seven pollination groups in apples, depending on climate:One cultivar can be pollinated by a compatible cultivar from the same group or close (A with A, or A with B, but not A with C or D). Varieties are sometimes classified by the day of peak bloom in the average 30-day blossom period, with pollenizers selected from varieties within a 6-day overlap period.

Cultivars vary in their yield and the ultimate size of the tree, even when grown on the same rootstock. Some cultivars, if left unpruned, will grow very large, which allows them to bear much more fruit, but makes harvesting very difficult. Depending on the tree density (number of trees planted per unit surface area), mature trees typically bear 40 - of apples each year, though productivity can be close to zero in poor years. Apples are harvested using three-point ladders that are designed to fit amongst the branches. Trees grafted on dwarfing rootstocks will bear about 10 - of fruit per year. Crops ripen at different times of the year according to the variety of apple. Varieties that yield their crop in the summer include Gala, Golden Supreme, McIntosh, Transparent, Primate,  Sweet Bough , and Duchess; fall producers include Fuji, Jonagold, Golden Delicious, Red Delicious, Chenango, Gravenstein, Wealthy, McIntosh, Snow, and Blenheim; winter producers include Winesap, Granny Smith, King, Wagener,  Swayzie , Greening, and Tolman Sweet.

Commercially, apples can be stored for some months in controlled-atmosphere chambers to delay  ethylene -induced ripening. Apples are commonly stored in chambers with higher concentrations of  carbon dioxide  and high air filtration. This prevents ethylene concentrations from rising to higher amounts and preventing ripening from occurring too quickly. Ripening continues when the fruit is removed from storage. For home storage, most varieties of apple can be held for approximately two weeks when kept at the coolest part of the refrigerator (i.e. below 5 °C). Some types, including the  Granny Smith  and  Fuji , can be stored up to a year without significant degradation.

Apple trees are susceptible to a number of  fungal  and  bacterial  diseases and insect pests. Many commercial orchards pursue an aggressive program of chemical sprays to maintain high fruit quality, tree health, and high yields. A trend in orchard management is the use of organic methods. These prohibit the use of synthetic pesticides, though some older pesticides are allowed.  Organic  methods include, for instance, introducing its natural predator to reduce the population of a particular pest. A wide range of pests and diseases can affect the plant; three of the more common diseases/pests are mildew, aphids and apple scab. Among the most serious disease problems are  fireblight , a bacterial disease; and  Gymnosporangium  rust, and  black spot , two fungal diseases. 

World production of apples in 2013 was 80.8 million  tonne s, with China producing 49% of this total (table).  Other major producers with 5% or less of the world total were the United States, Turkey, Poland and Italy.

A typical apple serving weighs 242 grams and provides 126  calories  with a moderate content of  dietary fiber  (table). Otherwise, there is generally low content of  essential nutrients  (table).

Apples are often eaten raw. The whole fruit including the skin is suitable for human consumption except for the seeds, which may affect some consumers. The core is often not eaten and is discarded. Varieties bred for raw consumption are termed dessert or  table apple s. Apples can be canned or juiced. They are milled or pressed to produce  apple juice , which may be drunk unfiltered (called  apple cider  in North America), or filtered. The juice can be  fermented  to make  cider  (called hard cider in North America),  ciderkin , and  vinegar . Through  distillation , various alcoholic beverages can be produced, such as  applejack ,  Calvados ,  and  apfelwein .  Apple seed oil and  pectin  may also be produced.

Apples are an important ingredient in many desserts, such as  apple pie , apple  crumble ,  apple crisp  and  apple cake . They are often eaten  baked  or  stewed , and they can also be dried and eaten or reconstituted (soaked in water, alcohol or some other liquid) for later use. When cooked, some apple varieties easily form a puree known as  apple sauce . Apples are also made into  apple butter  and apple jelly. They are also used (cooked) in meat dishes. Sliced apples turn brown with exposure to air due to the conversion of natural phenolic substances into  melanin  upon exposure to  oxygen .  Sliced apple consumption tripled in the US from 2004 to 2014 to 500 million apples annually due to its convenience.

Organic  apples are commonly produced in the United States. Organic production is difficult in Europe, though a few orchards have done so with commercial success, 

Apples are a rich source of various  phytochemical s including  flavonoid s (e.g.,  catechin s,  flavanol s, and  quercetin ) and other  phenolic compounds  (e.g.,  epicatechin  and  procyanidin s) found in the skin, core, and pulp of the apple;  they have unknown health value in humans. Ideain  (cyanidin 3-O-galactoside) is an  anthocyanin , a type of pigment, which is found in some red apple varieties. Phlorizin  is a flavonoid that is found in apple trees, particularly in the leaves, and in only small amounts if at all in other plants, even other species of the Malus genus or related plants such as pear trees.

Preliminary research is investigating whether nutrients and/or phytochemicals in apples may affect the risk of some types of  cancer . 

One form of apple allergy, often found in northern Europe, is called birch-apple syndrome, and is found in people who are also allergic to  birch   pollen . 

The seeds of apples contain small amounts of  amygdalin , a sugar and  cyanide  compound known as a  cyanogenic glycoside . Ingesting small amounts of apple seeds will cause no ill effects, but in extremely large doses can cause adverse reactions. There is only one known case of fatal cyanide poisoning from apple seeds; in this case the individual chewed and swallowed one  cup  of seeds. It may take several hours before the poison takes effect, as cyanogenic glycosides must be  hydrolyzed  before the cyanide ion is released.

The  proverb  " An apple a day keeps the doctor away ", addressing the health effects of the fruit, dates from 19th century Wales, according to Caroline Taggart, author of “An Apple a Day: Old-Fashioned Proverbs and Why They Still Work”. The original phrase, Taggart said, was: "Eat an apple on going to bed, and you’ll keep the doctor from earning his bread". In the 19th century and early 20th, the phrase evolved to “an apple a day, no doctor to pay” and “an apple a days sends the doctor away”, while the phrasing now commonly used was first recorded in 1922.