Fiorucci
'Fiorucci' is an  Italian  fashion label founded by  Elio Fiorucci  in 1967. The first shop exposed Milan to the styles of  Swinging London  and American classics such as the  T-shirt  and  jeans . By the late 1970s and early 1980s this would be reversed, and the New York store would become famous for the fashions it introduced to the United States. Known as the "daytime  Studio 54 ", it attracted trendsetters from  Andy Warhol  to a young  Madonna . As a leader in the  globalisation  of fashion Fiorucci would scour the globe, introducing a newly affluent mass market to underground trends such as thongs from Brazil and Afghan coats. The label popularised camouflage prints and leopard-skin prints before creating the designer jean market with the invention of stretch jeans. The iconic advertising usually featured a woman's buttocks in skin-tight denim, or in one case obscured by pink fluffy handcuffs, whilst the company logo is two cheeky angels modelled after  Raphael 's cherubs. However, mismanagement of the company led to receivership in 1989, and since then the brand has been dogged by legal battles over the trademarks, and several relaunches have failed to make much impact. Elio Fiorucci was found dead in his Milan home on July 20, 2015, at the age of 80. Relatives say he was in "good health" before his death, but he may have succumbed to sudden illnesses later on.

Elio Fiorucci  was born in  Milan  on 10 June 1935, son of a shoe shop owner. One day in 1962, Elio came up with the idea of making  galoshes  in bright primary colours whilst working at his father's shop. When they were featured in a local weekly fashion magazine, the galoshes caused a sensation. Following a trip to  London  in 1965, Elio was determined to bring  Carnaby Street  fashions to Milan. He opened his first shop on  Galleria Passerella  in  Milan  on 31 May 1967 selling clothes by  London  designers such as  Ossie Clark  and  Zandra Rhodes . In 1968 Fiorucci looked  East  for inspiration, buying cheap T-shirts from India, and turning rice sacks into bags. Two years later the company set up its own manufacturing plant, and adopted the "two angels" logo created by Italo Lupi. In 1974 the company opened a huge new store on Via Torino in Milan, expanding beyond fashion to offer books, furniture and music. The new shop also had a performance area, vintage clothing market, and restaurant, and was financed by an investment from the  Standa  department stores, part of the  Montedison  group. Meanwhile the label introduced the  monokini  and  thong  from Brazil, causing controversy with the topless photos used to advertise them. Glass beads from  New Mexico  were another hit. In 1975 the company opened its first store overseas, on the  King's Road  in London, and launched a children's collection called Fioruccino. It brought Afghan coats to the mass market, and popularised the leopard-skin prints first created by  Elsa Schiaparelli  two decades before.

The 1976 opening of the store down the block from  Bloomingdale's , on East  59th Street  between Lexington and Park Avenues in  New York City , introduced the brand to American trendsetters during the disco age. Customers such as  Marc Jacobs   Cher  and  Terence Conran  would rub shoulders with  Jackie Onassis  and  Lauren Bacall , you might see drag queen  Joey Arias  serving the  King of Spain , author  Douglas Coupland  absorbing the store's  pop culture or  Calvin Klein  and  Gloria Vanderbilt  buying some jeans. In the early 1980s the Fiorucci art director was jewelry designer  Maripol , known for creating Madonna's look at the time. Other employees included Madonna's brother Christopher Ciccone,  Terry Jones  of  i-D magazine  fame,  Oliviero Toscani , who shot many of the famous  Benetton  ads, and famed interior designer  Jim Walrod . In May 1979 cartoon/graffiti-based artist  Kenny Scharf  had his first solo exhibition in the  New York City  store, called "Fiorucci Celebrates the New Wave" and featured his colorful,  retro-futuristic  "Estelle Series." The opening included a performance by  Klaus Nomi , the new wave opera singer. Meanwhile, the company continued to bring new products to market, including a collection made from  DuPont 's new  Tyvek  fabric, and velvet slippers from China. In 1978 they were the first fashion house to license their name for a collection of sunglasses, whilst in 1981 a Disney licence led to a highly successful range of clothes emblazoned with  Mickey Mouse . Ever on the pulse of the times, Fiorucci sponsored the reunion of  Simon and Garfunkel  in  The Concert in Central Park  on 19 September 1981, attended by 400,000 people or more, and on the bill for their birthday party in 1983 was a then-unknown Madonna. In 1982 the company launched the first stretch jeans with  Lycra , and the success of the 5-pocket "Safety" jeans was recognised three years later in a licensing deal with  Wrangler Jeans . In 1987 Fiorucci produced the Junior Gaultier line designed by Jean-Paul Gaultier, and in 1989 they went back to their roots with a deal with  Vivienne Westwood , queen of the London street scene. The company expanded rapidly after 1978, launching new stores across the US, Europe and Asia. In  1981  Benetton  bought Montedison's 50% stake in Fiorucci, which was reduced to 33.3% in 1986  when Elio Fiorucci brought in Iranian businessman Massimo Aki Nuhi (Akinouhi) as a third partner via his holding company Aknofin. Benetton sold their remaining stake to Fiorucci and Aki Nuhi in August 1987.  Despite thriving sales, the company was dogged by poor management and had to close the New York store in 1986;  Betsey Johnson  has suggested "Fiorucci was the most happening place. It never stopped being happening — it just left New York City, because I don't think New York City was happening enough by the mid-80's". Fiorucci closed down the rest of the US retail locations in 1988 after a franchise dispute, moving instead to a wholesale strategy. The company went into administration in April 1989 following a dispute over the strategic direction of the firm that had seen Elio offer to buy out Aki Nuhi.

The company was rescued by the Tacchella brothers of Italian jeans company Carrera S.p. A., who sold on the company to Japanese jeans group  Edwin Co., Ltd  for 45bn lire (~US$41m).  In January 1996 after a plea bargain, Elio Fiorucci was given a suspended jail sentence of 22 months for inflating the value of invoices to increase the value of the company to Carrera at the expense of his creditors.  Luciano Benetton  was cleared of similar charges, on the grounds that he had not been involved at an operational level during his time (September 1985 - September 1987) on the board of Fiorucci. Originally  Edwin  planned to launch five stores in key cities like London, but although they signed an initial deal on 4 June 1990 that was ratified that October, Edwin did not gain control of the Fiorucci assets until May 1992. In fact they would later lose the rights to the Fiorucci name in Canada on the grounds of disuse. However, one of Edwin's first acts was a deal with  Coles Myer  that would see 68 Fiorucci concessions in stores across Australia. They opened a new store in Piazza San Babila, Milan in early 1993, that included a variety of branded boutiques. It took them longer to get things going in North America, after a 1993 deal with Mary Ann Wheaton of Wheaton International fell through. In 1995 they licensed the rights for eyewear in the US to Swan International Optical, and then opened a US office in September 1997. However, the strategy of their licensee, Stephen Budd, to sell the brand into US department stores didn't work out so in 1999 they announced a plan to open a New York store once again. The initial plan was to open in time for Christmas 1999, but the store on lower Broadway finally opened its doors in June 2001. Commentators such as Kim Hastreiter were sceptical that it could recapture the buzz of times past, given the increased competition in mass-market clubbing gear from the likes of  H&M  and  The Limited . Meanwhile the brand continued to thrive in  Europe , and regained some of its former notoriety in 1995 with a poster campaign for its jeans featuring a naked woman's buttocks and pink furry handcuffs, which became instant bestsellers. In 1999 it launched a successful perfume, followed by a second, Fiorucci Loves You, in 2001, and "Miss Fiorucci" makeup in 2003. Edwin have been aggressively expanding the brand throughout Asia, from Seoul to Tokyo and China. Although  Elio Fiorucci  retained creative control during the Edwin era, they are protective of the Fiorucci trademarks, and have taken legal action against H&M in the US when Elio designed their Poolside line. He has also set up a brand of his own called Love Therapy, and designed for  Agent Provocateur . In March 2003,  Elio Fiorucci  announced that after 36 years, he was closing the doors to his historic shop in  Corso Vittorio Emmanuele ,  Milan . When Fiorucci hit the scene nearly 40 years ago, he blew Italy - and the rest of the world - away with a larger-than-life attitude. He brought in the new and unexpected, pre-dating the surge of today's "lifestyle" stores. Fiorucci mixed clothing with beauty products, vintage items, music and home furnishings. He even used his retail space for artistic performances. Elio said the reason he was closing his shop was because he had "fallen out of love" with fashion. Elio became an  ethical vegetarian .

In 1979, along with  Halston  and  Gucci , Fiorucci was memorably name-checked in the  Sister Sledge  disco song, " He's The Greatest Dancer ". Another artist,singer and songwriter Terence Boylan, also name-checked Fiorucci in his 1980 song, "Shake Your Fiorucci" [(Suzy Terence Boylan Asylum 6E-201 (1980)]. As did Antipodean band Australian Crawl in their 1980 song, "Hoochie Gucci Fiorucci Mama", which also referenced Gucci. The  Beverly Hills  Fiorucci store was featured in the 1980 cult classic movie  Xanadu , where the   ELO  video "All Over the World" was filmed. A fake Fiorucci store was built on the set of the final battle in New York city for the movie Superman II in 1979. Christopher Ciccone stated in his book Life With My Sister, Madonna that he worked at the Manhattan store in the early 80's; also stating that is where he met his lover. British  artist  Mark Leckey  used the brand name in his  landmark  work from 2000, Fiorucci Made Me Hardcore. The 1981 EP  Minor Disturbance  by American punk band  The Teen Idles  featured the song "Fiorucci Nightmare".