Indonesia
'Indonesia' (  or  ;  Indonesian : ), officially the 'Republic of Indonesia' (Republik Indonesia ), is a  unitary   sovereign state  and  [transcontinental country](List of transcontinental countries)  located mainly in  Southeast Asia  with some territories in  Oceania . Situated between the  Indian  and  Pacific  oceans, it is the world's largest  island country , with more than  [thirteen thousand islands](List of islands of Indonesia) . At 1,904,569 square kilometres (735,358 sq mi), Indonesia is the world's  [14th-largest country](List of countries and dependencies by area)  in terms of land area and world's  [7th-largest country](List of countries and dependencies by area)  in terms of combined sea and land area. It has an estimated population of over 260 million people and is the world's  [fourth most populous country](List of countries and dependencies by population) , the most populous  Austronesian  nation, as well as the most populous  Muslim-majority country . The world's  [most populous island](List of islands by population)  of  Java  contains more than half of the country's population. Indonesia's republican form of government includes an elected  legislature  and  president . Indonesia has  34 provinces , of which five have Special Administrative status. Its capital and most populous city is  Jakarta . The country shares land borders with  Papua New Guinea ,  East Timor , and the  eastern part  of  Malaysia . Other neighbouring countries include  Singapore , the  Philippines ,  Australia ,  Palau , and the  India n territory of the  Andaman and Nicobar Islands . Despite its large population and densely populated regions, Indonesia has vast areas of wilderness that support the  world's second highest level of   biodiversity . The country has abundant natural resources like  oil  and  natural gas ,  tin ,  copper  and  gold .  Agriculture  mainly produces  rice ,  palm oil ,  tea ,  coffee ,  cacao ,  medicinal plants ,  spice s and  rubber . Indonesia's major trading partners are  Japan ,  United States ,  China  and the surrounding countries of Singapore, Malaysia and Australia. The Indonesian archipelago has been an important region for trade since at least the 7th century, when  Srivijaya  and then later  Majapahit  traded with  China  and  India . Local rulers gradually absorbed foreign cultural, religious and political models from the early centuries  CE , and  Hindu  and  Buddhist  kingdoms flourished.  Indonesian history  has been influenced by foreign powers drawn to its natural resources.  Muslim  traders and  Sufi  scholars brought the now-dominant  Islam , while European powers brought  Christianity  and fought one another to monopolise trade in the Spice Islands of  Maluku  during the  Age of Discovery . Following three and a half centuries of  Dutch colonialism  starting from  Amboina  and  Batavia , and eventually all of  the archipelago  including  Timor  and  West Papua , at times interrupted by  Portuguese ,  French and British  rule, Indonesia  secured its independence  after  World War II . Indonesia also take a part to support Africa and Asian nations to oppose against any  colonialism  or  neocolonialism . Indonesia consists of hundreds of distinct native  ethnic  and  linguistic groups . The largest – and politically dominant – ethnic group are the  Javanese . A shared  identity  has developed, defined by a  national language , ethnic diversity, religious pluralism within a Muslim-majority population, and a history of colonialism and rebellion against it. Indonesia's national motto, " Bhinneka Tunggal Ika " ("Unity in Diversity" literally, "many, yet one"), articulates the diversity that shapes the country. The  Indonesian economy  is the world's  [16th](List of countries by GDP (nominal))  largest by nominal GDP and the  [8th](List of countries by GDP (PPP))  largest by GDP at  PPP , and considered as  Emerging markets  and  Newly industrialized country . Indonesia has been a member of the  United Nations  since 1950. Indonesia was the founder of  Non-Aligned Movement ; and also the founding member of  Association of Southeast Asian Nations ,  Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ,  East Asia Summit , and  Organisation of Islamic Cooperation . Indonesia is a member of the  G20  major economies,  OPEC , and  World Trade Organization .

The name Indonesia derives from the Greek name of the  Indus River  and the word nèsos, meaning "Indian island". The name dates to the 18th century, far predating the formation of independent Indonesia. In 1850,  George Windsor Earl , an English  ethnologist , proposed the terms Indunesians—and, his preference, Malayunesians—for the inhabitants of the "Indian Archipelago or Malayan Archipelago". In the same publication, a student of Earl's,  James Richardson Logan , used Indonesia as a synonym for Indian Archipelago. However, Dutch academics writing in East Indies publications were reluctant to use Indonesia. Instead, they used the terms Malay Archipelago (Maleische Archipel); the Netherlands East Indies (Nederlandsch Oost Indië), popularly Indië; the East (de Oost); and Insulinde. After 1900, the name Indonesia became more common in academic circles outside the Netherlands, and Indonesian nationalist groups adopted it for political expression.  Adolf Bastian , of the University of Berlin, popularised the name through his book Indonesien oder die Inseln des Malayischen Archipels, 1884–1894. The first Indonesian scholar to use the name was  Suwardi Suryaningrat  (Ki Hajar Dewantara), when he established a press bureau in the Netherlands with the name Indonesisch Pers-bureau in 1913.

Fossils and the remains of tools show that the Indonesian archipelago was inhabited by  Homo erectus , popularly known as " Java Man ", between 1.5 million years ago and 35,000 years ago.  Homo sapiens  reached the region by around 45,000 years ago.  Austronesian peoples , who form the majority of the modern population, migrated to Southeast Asia from  Taiwan . They arrived in Indonesia around 2000 BCE, and as they spread through the archipelago, confined the indigenous  Melanesian peoples  to the far eastern regions. Ideal agricultural conditions and the mastering of  wet-field rice cultivation  as early as the 8th century BCE, allowed villages, towns, and small kingdoms to flourish by the 1st century CE. Indonesia's strategic sea-lane position fostered inter-island and international trade, including links with Indian kingdoms and China, which were established several centuries BCE. Trade has since fundamentally shaped Indonesian history. From the 7th century CE, the powerful  Srivijaya  naval kingdom flourished as a result of trade and the influences of  Hinduism  and  Buddhism  that were imported with it. Between the eighth and 10th centuries CE, the agricultural Buddhist  Sailendra  and Hindu  Mataram  dynasties thrived and declined in inland Java, leaving grand religious monuments such as  Borobudur ,  Sewu  and  Prambanan . This period marked a renaissance of Hindu- Buddhist art  in ancient Java. Around the first quarter of the 10th century, the centre of the kingdom was shifted from Mataram area in Central Java to  Brantas River  valley in East Java by  Mpu Sindok , who established the  Isyana Dynasty . Subsequently, series of Javanese Hindu-Buddhist polities rise and fall, from  Kahuripan  kingdom ruled by  Airlangga  to  Kadiri  and  Singhasari . In West Java,  Sunda Kingdom  was re-established circa 1030 according to  Sanghyang Tapak inscription . In Bali, the  Warmadewas  established their rule on the  Kingdom of Bali  in the 10th century. The Hindu  Majapahit  kingdom was founded in eastern Java in the late 13th century, and under  Gajah Mada , its influence stretched over much of Indonesia.

Although Muslim traders first travelled through Southeast Asia early in the Islamic era, the  earliest evidence of Islamised populations  in Indonesia dates to the 13th century in northern  Sumatra . Other Indonesian areas gradually adopted Islam, and it was the dominant religion in Java and Sumatra by the end of the 16th century. For the most part, Islam overlaid and mixed with existing cultural and religious influences, which shaped the predominant form of Islam in Indonesia, particularly in Java. The first regular contact between Europeans and the peoples of Indonesia  began in 1512, when Portuguese traders led by  Francisco Serrão , sought to monopolise the sources of  nutmeg ,  clove s, and  cubeb pepper  in Maluku. Dutch and British traders followed. In 1602, the Dutch established the  Dutch East India Company  (VOC), and in following decades, the Dutch has gained foothold in  Batavia  and  Amboina . Throughout 17th and 18th centuries, the company became the dominant European power in the archipelago. Following bankruptcy, the VOC was formally dissolved in 1800, and the government of the Netherlands established the  Dutch East Indies  as a nationalised colony. For most of  the colonial period , Dutch control over the archipelago was tenuous outside of coastal strongholds; only in the early 20th century did Dutch dominance extend to what was to become Indonesia's current boundaries. Despite major internal political, social and sectarian divisions during the  National Revolution , Indonesians, on the whole, found unity in their fight for independence.  Japanese occupation  during World War II ended Dutch rule, and encouraged the previously suppressed Indonesian independence movement.

A later  UN  report stated that four million people died in Indonesia as a result of famine and  forced labor  during the Japanese occupation. Two days after the surrender of Japan in August 1945,  Sukarno , an influential nationalist leader, declared independence and was appointed president. The Netherlands tried to reestablish their rule, and  an armed and diplomatic struggle  ended in December 1949, when in the face of international pressure, the Dutch formally recognised Indonesian independence (with the exception of  the Dutch territory of West New Guinea , which was incorporated into Indonesia following the 1962  New York Agreement , and the UN-mandated  Act of Free Choice  of 1969). Sukarno moved Indonesia from democracy towards authoritarianism, and maintained his power base by balancing the opposing forces of the  military  and the  Communist Party of Indonesia  (Partai Komunis Indonesia, PKI).  An attempted coup  on 30 September 1965 was countered by the army, who led  a violent anti-communist purge , during which the PKI was blamed for the coup and effectively destroyed. Large-scale killings took place which targeted communists, ethnic Chinese and alleged leftists. The most widely accepted estimates are that between 500,000 and one million people were killed, with some estimates as high as two to three million. The head of the military,  General Suharto ,  outmaneuvered  the politically weakened Sukarno and was formally appointed president in March 1968. His  New Order administration  was supported by the US government, and encouraged  foreign direct investment  in Indonesia, which was a major factor in the subsequent three decades of substantial economic growth. However, the authoritarian "New Order" was widely accused of  corruption  and suppression of political opposition. Indonesia was the country hardest hit by the  late 1990s Asian financial crisis . This increased popular discontent with the New Order and led to  popular protest  across the country. Suharto resigned on 21 May 1998. In 1999, East Timor  voted  to secede from Indonesia, after  a twenty-five-year military occupation  that was marked by international condemnation of repression of the East Timorese. Since Suharto's resignation,  a strengthening of democratic processes  has included a regional autonomy program, and the first  direct presidential election in 2004 , which was won by  Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono , who went on to win a second term in  2009 . Political and economic instability, social unrest,  corruption , and  terrorism  slowed progress; however, in the last five years the economy has performed strongly. Although relations among different religious and ethnic groups are largely harmonious, sectarian discontent and violence have persisted. A political settlement to an armed separatist conflict in  Aceh  was achieved in 2005.

Indonesia lies between latitudes  11°S  and  6°N , and longitudes  95°E  and  141°E . It is the largest  [archipelagic country](List of islands of Indonesia)  in the world, extending 5120 km from east to west and 1760 km from north to south. According to a geospatial survey conducted between 2007 and 2010 by  National Coordinating Agency for Survey and Mapping  (Bakosurtanal), Indonesia has 13,466 islands, about 6,000 of which are inhabited. These are scattered over both sides of the  equator . The largest are Java, Sumatra,  Borneo  (shared with Brunei and Malaysia), New Guinea (shared with Papua New Guinea), and Sulawesi. Indonesia shares land borders with Malaysia on Borneo, Papua New Guinea on the island of New Guinea, and East Timor on the island of  Timor . Indonesia shares maritime borders across narrow straits with  Singapore ,  Malaysia , the  Philippines , and  Palau  to the north, and with  Australia  to the south. The capital, Jakarta, is on Java and is the nation's largest city, followed by Surabaya, Bandung, Medan, and Semarang. Indonesia average population density is 134 people per square kilometre (347 per sq mi), 79th in the world, although Java, the world's most populous island, has a population density of 940 people per square kilometre (2,435 per sq mi). At 4884 m,  Puncak Jaya  in Papua is Indonesia's highest peak, and  Lake Toba  in Sumatra its largest lake, with an area of 1,145 square kilometres (442 sq mi). Indonesia's largest rivers are in Kalimantan, and include the  Mahakam  and  Barito ; such rivers are communication and transport links between the island's river settlements. Indonesia's location on the edges of the  Pacific ,  Eurasian , and  Australian   tectonic plate s makes it the site of numerous  [volcanoes](List of volcanoes in Indonesia)  and frequent earthquakes. Indonesia has at least 150 active volcanoes, including  Krakatoa  and  Tambora , both famous for their devastating eruptions in the 19th century. The eruption of the Toba  supervolcano , approximately 70,000 years ago, was one of the largest eruptions ever, and a  global catastrophe . Recent disasters due to seismic activity include the  2004 tsunami  that killed an estimated 167,736 in northern Sumatra, and the  Yogyakarta earthquake  in 2006. However,  volcanic ash  is a major contributor to the high agricultural fertility that has historically sustained the high population densities of Java and Bali.

Lying along the  equator , Indonesia's climate tends to be relatively even year-round. Indonesia has two seasons—a  wet season  and a  dry season —with no extremes of summer or winter. For most of Indonesia, the dry season falls between  April  and  October  with the wet season between  November  and  March . Indonesia's climate is almost entirely  tropical , dominated by the  Tropical rainforest climate  found in every major island of Indonesia, followed by the  Tropical monsoon climate  that predominantly lies along Java's coastal north, Sulawesi's coastal south and east, and  Bali , and finally the tropical  Savanna climate , found in isolated locations of  Central Java , lowland  East Java , coastal southern Papua and smaller islands to the east of  Lombok . However, cooler climate types do exist in mountainous regions of Indonesia 1300–1500 metres above sea level. The oceanic climate (Köppen Cfb) prevail in highland areas with fairly uniform precipitation year-round, adjacent to rainforest climates, while the subtropical highland climate (Köppen Cwb) exist in highland areas with a more pronounced dry season, adjacent to tropical monsoon and savanna climates. Some regions, such as  Kalimantan  and  Sumatra , experience only slight differences in  rainfall  and  temperature  between the seasons, whereas others, such as  Nusa Tenggara , experience far more pronounced differences with droughts in the dry season, and floods in the wet. Rainfall in Indonesia is plentiful, particularly in  West Sumatra ,  West Kalimantan ,  West Java , and  Papua . Parts of  Sulawesi  and some islands closer to Australia, such as  Sumba  is drier. The almost uniformly warm waters that make up 81% of Indonesia's area ensure that temperatures on land remain fairly constant. The coastal plains averaging 28 °C, the inland and mountain areas averaging 26 °C, and the higher mountain regions, 23 °C. The area's relative  humidity  ranges between 70 and 90%. Winds are moderate and generally predictable, with  monsoon s usually blowing in from the south and east in  June  through  October  and from the northwest in  November  through  March .  Typhoon s and large scale storms pose little hazard to mariners in Indonesia waters; the major danger comes from swift currents in channels, such as the  Lombok  and  Sape  straits.

Tectonically , Indonesia is highly unstable. It lies on the  Pacific Ring of Fire  where the  Indo-Australian Plate  and the  Pacific Plate  are pushed under the  Eurasian plate  where they melt at about 100 km deep. A string of volcanoes stretches from  Sumatra  to the  Banda Sea . While the  volcanic ash  has resulted in fertile  soil s, it makes agricultural conditions unpredictable in some areas. The string of volcanoes runs through Sumatra,  Java ,  Bali  and  Nusa Tenggara , and then loops around through to the  Banda Islands  of  Maluku  to northeastern  Sulawesi . Of the 400 volcanoes, approximately 150 are active. The most massive supervolcano eruption was the  Toba eruption  that took place at the present location of  Lake Toba , about   Before Present . The supervolcano eruption is believed to had caused  volcanic winter  and cooling of the climate, and subsequently led to a  genetic bottleneck  in  human evolution  about 50,000 years ago. Between 1972 and 1991, 29 volcanic eruptions were recorded, mostly on Java. The two most violent volcanic eruptions in modern times occurred in Indonesia; in 1815  Mount Tambora  in  Sumbawa  erupted killing 92,000 people. Tambora produced the largest eruption known on the planet during the past 10,000 years. Also the eruption created an umbrella of volcanic ash which spread and blanketed  Southeast Asia , plunging it into darkness for a week, and made a  whole world without a summer  in 1815. The  1883 eruption of Krakatoa  was one of the deadliest and most destructive volcanic events in recorded history. Nearly 40,000 deaths are attributed to the eruption itself and the  tsunami s it created. Significant additional effects were also felt around the world in the days and weeks after the volcano's destruction.

Indonesia's size, tropical climate, and archipelagic geography, support the world's second highest level of biodiversity after  Brazil . Its flora and fauna is a mixture of Asian and  Australasia n species. The islands of the  Sunda Shelf  (Sumatra, Java, Borneo, and Bali) were once linked to the Asian mainland, and have a wealth of Asian fauna. Large species such as the  tiger ,  rhinoceros ,  orangutan ,  elephant , and  leopard , were once abundant as far east as Bali, but numbers and distribution have dwindled drastically. Forests cover approximately 60% of the country. In Sumatra and Kalimantan, these are predominantly of Asian species. However, the forests of the smaller, and more densely populated Java, have largely been removed for human habitation and agriculture. Sulawesi, Nusa Tenggara, and Maluku – having been long separated from the continental landmasses—have developed their own unique flora and fauna. Papua was part of the Australian landmass, and is home to a  unique fauna and flora  closely related to that of Australia, including over 600 bird species. Indonesia is second only to Australia in terms of total endemic species, with 36% of its 1,531 species of bird and 39% of its 515 species of mammal being endemic. Indonesia's 80,000 km of coastline are surrounded by tropical seas that contribute to the country's high level of biodiversity. Indonesia has a range of sea and coastal  ecosystem s, including  [beaches](List of beaches in Indonesia) ,  sand dune s,  estuaries ,  mangrove s,  coral reef s,  seagrass  beds,  coastal mudflats , tidal flats, algal beds, and small island ecosystems. Indonesia is one of  Coral Triangle  countries with the world's greatest diversity of  coral reef fish  with more than 1,650 species in eastern Indonesia only. The British naturalist  Alfred Russel Wallace  described a dividing line between the distribution of Indonesia's Asian and Australasian species. Known as the  Wallace Line , it runs roughly north–south along the edge of the Sunda Shelf, between Kalimantan and Sulawesi, and along the deep  Lombok Strait , between  Lombok  and Bali. West of the line the flora and fauna are more Asian – moving east from Lombok they are increasingly Australian. In his 1869 book,  The Malay Archipelago , Wallace described numerous species unique to the area. The region of islands between his line and New Guinea is now termed  Wallacea .

Indonesia is a republic with a presidential system. As a unitary state, power is concentrated in the central government. Following the  resignation of President Suharto  in 1998, Indonesian political and governmental structures have undergone major reforms. Four amendments to the  1945 Constitution of Indonesia  have revamped the  executive ,  judicial , and  legislative  branches. The  president of Indonesia  is the  head of state  and  head of government ,  commander-in-chief  of Tentara Nasional Indonesia ( Indonesian National Armed Forces ), and the director of domestic governance, policy-making, and foreign affairs. The president appoints a council of ministers, who are not required to be elected members of the legislature. The 2004 presidential election was the first in which the people directly elected the president and vice-president. The president may serve a maximum of two consecutive five-year terms. The highest representative body at national level is Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat ( People's Consultative Assembly ) or MPR. Its main functions are supporting and amending the constitution, inaugurating the president, and formalising broad outlines of state policy. It has the power to impeach the president. The MPR comprises two houses; Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat ( People's Representative Council ) or DPR, with 560 members, and Dewan Perwakilan Daerah ( Regional Representative Council ) or DPD, with 132 members. The DPR passes legislation and monitors the executive branch; party-aligned members are elected for five-year terms by  proportional representation . Reforms since 1998 have markedly increased the DPR's role in national governance. The DPD is a new chamber for matters of regional management. Most civil disputes appear before Pengadilan Negeri (State Court); appeals are heard before Pengadilan Tinggi  (High Court).  Mahkamah Agung  is the country's highest court, and hears final cessation appeals and conducts case reviews. Other courts include the Commercial Court, which handles bankruptcy and insolvency; Pengadilan Tata Negara (State Administrative Court) to hear administrative law cases against the government; Mahkamah Konstitusi (Constitutional Court) to hear disputes concerning legality of law, general elections, dissolution of political parties, and the scope of authority of state institutions; and Pengadilan Agama (Religious Court) to deal with codified Sharia Law cases.

Since 1999 Indonesia has had a multi-party system. In the two  legislative elections  since the fall of the  New Order  regime, no political party has managed to win an overall majority of seats, resulting in  coalition government s. The  Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle  (Partai Demokrasi Indonesia Perjuangan) is the party of  Joko Widodo , the Indonesian President. The  Great Indonesia Movement Party  (Partai Gerakan Indonesia Raya) is the third largest political party.

Administratively, Indonesia consists of 34 provinces, five of which have special status. Each province has its own legislature and governor. The provinces are subdivided into regencies ( [kabupaten](List of regencies and cities of Indonesia) ) and cities ( [kota](List of regencies and cities of Indonesia) ), which are further subdivided into  districts  (kecamatan or distrik in Papua and West Papua), and again into  administrative village s (either desa, kelurahan, kampung, nagari in West Sumatra, or gampong in Aceh). The village is the lowest level of government administration in Indonesia. Furthermore, a village is divided into several community groups (rukun warga (RW)) which are further divided into neighbourhood groups (rukun tetangga (RT)). In Java the desa (village) is divided further into smaller units called dusun or dukuh (hamlets), these units are the same as rukun warga. Following the implementation of regional autonomy measures in 2001, the regencies and cities have become the key administrative units, responsible for providing most government services. The village administration level is the most influential on a citizen's daily life and handles matters of a village or neighbourhood through an elected lurah or kepala desa (village chief). The provinces of  Aceh ,  Jakarta ,  Yogyakarta ,  Papua , and  West Papua  have greater legislative privileges and a higher degree of autonomy from the central government than the other provinces. The Acehnese government, for example, has the right to create certain elements of an independent legal system. In 2003, it instituted a form of  sharia  (Islamic law). Yogyakarta was granted the status of Special Region in recognition of its pivotal role in supporting Indonesian Republicans during the Indonesian Revolution and its willingness to join Indonesia as a republic. Papua, formerly known as Irian Jaya, was granted special autonomy status in 2001 and was split into Papua and West Papua in February 2003. Jakarta is the country's special capital region. Indonesian name is in parentheses if different from English. indicates provinces with special status' Sumatra Island  (Pulau Sumatera) Java Island  (Pulau Jawa) Lesser Sunda Islands  (Kepulauan Nusa Tenggara) Kalimantan Island  (Pulau Kalimantan) Sulawesi Island  (Pulau Sulawesi) Maluku Islands  (Kepulauan Maluku) New Guinea Island  (Pulau Papua)'

In contrast to Sukarno's anti- imperialistic   antipathy  to  Western powers  and  tensions with Malaysia ,  Indonesia's foreign relations  since the New Order era have been based on economic and political co-operation with the Western world. Indonesia maintains close relationships with its neighbours in Asia, and is a founding member of  ASEAN  and the  East Asia Summit . The country restored relations with the People's Republic of China in 1990 following a freeze in place since anti-communist purges early in the Suharto era. Indonesia has been a member of the United Nations since 1950, and was a founder of the  Non-Aligned Movement  (NAM) and the  Organisation of the Islamic Conference  (OIC). Indonesia is signatory to the  ASEAN Free Trade Area  agreement, the  Cairns Group , and the  World Trade Organization  (WTO), and an occasional member of  OPEC . Indonesia has received humanitarian and development aid since 1966, in particular from the United States, western Europe, Australia, and Japan. The Indonesian government has worked with other countries to apprehend and prosecute perpetrators of major bombings linked to militant  Islamism  and  Al-Qaeda . The  deadliest bombing killed 202 people  (including 164 international tourists) in the  Bali  resort town of  Kuta  in 2002. The attacks, and subsequent travel warnings issued by other countries, severely damaged Indonesia's  tourism industry  and foreign investment prospects.

Indonesia's Armed Forces  (TNI) include the  Army  (TNI–AD),  Navy  (TNI–AL, which includes  Marine Corps ), and  Air Force  (TNI–AU). The army has about 400,000 active-duty personnel. Defense spending in the national budget was 4% of GDP in 2006, and is controversially supplemented by revenue from military commercial interests and foundations. One of the reforms following the 1998 resignation of Suharto was the removal of formal TNI representation in parliament; nevertheless, its political influence remains extensive. Separatist movements in the provinces of Aceh and Papua have led to armed conflict, and subsequent allegations of human rights abuses and brutality from all sides. Following a sporadic thirty-year guerrilla war between the Gerakan Aceh Merdeka  (GAM)  and the Indonesian military, a ceasefire agreement was reached in 2005. In Papua, there has been a significant, albeit imperfect, implementation of regional autonomy laws, and a reported decline in the levels of violence and  human rights abuses , since the presidency of Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.

Indonesia has a  mixed economy  in which both the private sector and government play significant roles. The country is the largest economy in Southeast Asia and a member of the  G-20 major economies . Indonesia's estimated  gross domestic product (nominal) , as of 2016, is US$936.955 billion while GDP in PPP terms is US$$3.010 trillion. It is the  [sixteenth largest economy in the world by nominal GDP](List of countries by GDP (nominal))  and is the  [eighth largest in terms of GDP (PPP)](List of countries by GDP (PPP)) . As of 2016, per capita GDP in PPP is US$11,633 ( international dollar s) while Nominal  per capita GDP  is US$3,620. The debt ratio to GDP is 26%. The services is the economy's largest and accounts for 43.3% of GDP (2016), this is followed by  manufacturing sector  (42.9%) and agriculture (13.7%). Since 2012, the  service sector  has employed more people than other sectors. In 2014 accounting for 44.8% of the total labour force was employed on service sector, this has been followed by agriculture (34.3%) and industry (20.9%). Agriculture, however, had been the country's largest employer for centuries. Indonesia was the 25th biggest exporting country in the world in 2014, moving up fifth places from the previous five years. In the 2009–2014 period, the exports of Indonesia have increased at an annualized rate of 7.3%, from US$138 billion in 2009 to US$197 billion in 2014. The most recent exports are led by coal briquettes which represent 10.1% of the total exports, followed by palm oil (8.85%), petroleum gas (8.63%), crude petroleum (4.92%) and rubber (2.75%). Indonesia's main export markets (2014) are Japan (12.64%), China (10.56%), the United States (9.54%), Singapore (9.49%) and India (6.9%). The major suppliers of imports to Indonesia are China (18.26%), Singapore (14.38%), Japan (8.65%), South Korea (6.52%) and Malaysia (5.96%). In 2014, Indonesia ran a trade surplus with export revenues of US$197 billion and import expenditure of US$178 billion. Indonesia has extensive natural resources, including crude oil, natural gas, tin, copper, and gold. Indonesia's major imports include machinery and equipment, chemicals, fuels, and foodstuffs, and the country's major export commodities include oil and gas, electrical appliances, plywood, rubber, and textiles. In an attempt to boost the domestic mineral processing industry and encourage exports of higher value-added mineral products, the Indonesian government implemented a ban on exports of unprocessed mineral ores in 2014. Palm oil  production is important to the economy of Indonesia as the country is the world's biggest producer and consumer of the commodity, providing about half the world supply.  Oil palm  plantations stretch across 6 million hectares (roughly twice the size of  Belgium ). Indonesia plans by 2015 to add 4 million additional hectares towards oil palm biofuel production. As of 2012, Indonesia produces 35 percent of the world's  certified sustainable palm oil  (CSPO). The  tourism sector  contributes to around US$10.1 billion of foreign exchange in 2013, and ranked as the 4th largest among goods and services export sectors. Singapore, Malaysia, Australia, China and Japan are the top five source of visitors to Indonesia. Corruption has been a persistent problem. Transparency International, for example, has since ranked Indonesia below 100 in its  Corruption Perceptions Index . Since 2007, however, with the improvement in banking sector and domestic consumption, national economic growth has accelerated to over 6% annually and this helped Indonesia weather the 2008–2009  Great Recession . The Indonesian economy performed strongly during the  financial crisis of 2007–08  and in 2012, its GDP grew by over 6%. Indonesia regained its investment grade rating in late 2011 after losing it in 1997. As of 2014, 11% of the population lived below the poverty line and the official open unemployment rate was 5.9%. Indonesia has a sizeable  automotive industry , which produced almost 1.3 million motor vehicles in 2014, ranking as the  [15th largest producer in the world](List of countries by motor vehicle production) . Nowadays, Indonesian automotive companies are able to produce cars with high ratio of local content (80% – 90%). With production peaking at 14.5 billion packs in 2011, Indonesia is the second largest producer of instant noodle after China which produces 42.5 billion packs a year.  Indofood  is the largest instant noodle producer in the world.  Indomie  brand by Indofood is one of the Indonesia's best known global brand. Of the world's 500 largest companies measured by revenue in 2014, the  Fortune Global 500 , two are headquartered in Indonesia i.e.  Pertamina  and  Perusahaan Listrik Negara .

Road transport is predominant, with a total system length of 437,759 km in 2008. Many cities and towns have some form of transportation for hire available as well such as  taxis . There are usually also bus services of various kinds such as the  Kopaja  buses and the more sophisticated  TransJakarta   bus rapid transit  system in Jakarta. The TransJakarta is the largest bus rapid transit system in the world, boasts some 194 km and carriers more than 300,000 passengers daily. In addition, BRT systems exist in  Yogyakarta ,  Palembang ,  Bandung ,  Denpasar ,  Pekanbaru ,  Semarang ,  Makassar , and  Padang  without segregated lane. Many cities also have motorised  auto rickshaw s ( bajaj ) of various kinds.  Cycle rickshaw s, called becak in Indonesia, are a regular sight on city roads and provide inexpensive transportation. The  rail transport  system has four unconnected networks in  Java  and  Sumatra  primarily dedicated to transport bulk commodities and long-distance passenger traffic. The  inter-city rail  network on Java is complemented by local  commuter rail  services in the  Jakarta metropolitan area  ( KA Commuter Jabodetabek ),  Surabaya ,  Medan , and  Bandung . In Jakarta, suburban rail services carry 700,000 passengers a day. In addition,  mass rapid transit  and  light rail transit  systems are under construction in Jakarta and Palembang. Sea transport is extremely important for economic integration and for domestic and foreign trade. It is well developed, with each of the major islands having at least one significant  port city . Because Indonesia encompasses a sprawling  archipelago ,  maritime shipping  provides essential links between different parts of the country. Boats in common use include large  container ship s, a variety of ferries, passenger ships, sailing ships, and smaller motorised vessels. Traditional wooden vessel  pinisi  still widely used as the inter-island freight service within Indonesian archipelago.  Port of Tanjung Priok  is Indonesia's busiest port, and the  [21st busiest port in the world in 2013](List of world's busiest container ports) , handling over 6.59 million TEUs. To boost the port capacity, two-phase "New Tanjung Priok" extension project is currently ongoing. When fully operational in 2023, it will triple existing annual capacity. In 2015 ground breaking of North Sumatra's Kuala Tanjung Port has been done. The port is an extremely strategic development that can accommodate 400.000 TEUs (twenty-foot equivalent units) per year, overtaking  Johor's   Tanjung Pelepas Port  and could even compete with  Singapore's port . Frequent ferry services cross the straits between nearby islands, especially in the chain of islands stretching from  Sumatra  through  Java  to the  Lesser Sunda Islands . On the busy crossings between Sumatra, Java, and  Bali , multiple car ferries run frequently twenty-four hours per day. There are also international ferry services between across the  Strait of Malacca  between Sumatra and  Malaysia , and between  Singapore  and nearby Indonesian islands, such as  Batam . A network of passenger ships makes longer connections to more remote islands, especially in the eastern part of the archipelago. The national shipping line,  Pelni , provides passenger service to  port s throughout the country on a two to four week schedule. These ships generally provide the least expensive way to cover long distances between islands. Still smaller privately run boats provide service between islands. As of 2014, there were 237 airports in Indonesia, including 17 international airports.  Soekarno–Hatta International Airport  is the  [18th busiest airport in the world](List of the world's busiest airports by passenger traffic) , serving 54,053,905 passengers, according to Airports Council International. Today the airport is running over capacity. After T3 Soekarno-Hatta Airport expansion was finished in August 2016, the total capacity of three terminals become 43 million passengers a year. T1 and T2 also will be revitalised, so all the three terminals finally will accommodate 67 million passengers a year. When finished, Soekarno-Hatta airport will be an  aerotropolis .  Juanda Airport  in Surabaya and  Ngurah Rai  in Bali are the country's 2nd and 3rd busiest airport. Garuda Indonesia , flag carrier of Indonesia since 1949, was selected by  Skytrax  as "The World's Best Economy Class" in 2013. In December 2014, Garuda Indonesia was awarded as a "5-Star Airline" by Skytrax and the eight best airlines in the world. As well as in June 2015, it also was awarded with "The World's Best Cabin Crew".

According to the  2010 national census , the  population of Indonesia  is 237.6 million, with high population growth at 1.9%. 58% of the population lives in  Java , the world's most populous island. In 1961, the first post-colonial census gave a total population of 97 million. Indonesia currently possess a relatively young population, with a median age of 28.2 years (2011 estimate). The population is expected to grow to around 269 million by 2020 and 321 million by 2050. An additional 8 million  Indonesian live overseas , comprising one of the world's largest  diaspora s. Most of them settled in  Malaysia ,  Saudi Arabia ,  United Arab Emirates ,  South Korea ,  Japan ,  Singapore ,  Netherlands ,  United States , and  Australia .

Indonesia is a very ethnically and linguistically diverse country, with around 300 distinct native ethnic groups, and 742 different languages and dialects. Most Indonesians are descended from  Austronesian -speaking peoples whose languages can be traced to Proto-Austronesian, which possibly originated in  Taiwan . Another major grouping are the  Melanesians , who inhabit eastern Indonesia. The largest ethnic group are the  Javanese , who comprise 42% of the population, and are politically and culturally dominant. The  Sundanese , ethnic  Malays , and  Madurese  are the largest non-Javanese groups. A sense of Indonesian nationhood exists alongside strong regional identities. Social, religious and ethnic tensions have triggered communal violence.  Chinese Indonesians  are an influential ethnic minority comprising 3–4% of the population. Much of the country's privately owned commerce and wealth is Chinese-Indonesian-controlled. Chinese businesses in Indonesia are part of the larger  bamboo network , a network of  overseas Chinese  businesses operating in the markets of Southeast Asia that share common family and cultural ties. This has contributed to considerable resentment, and even anti-Chinese violence.

More than 700  regional language s are spoken in Indonesia's numerous islands. Some belong to the  Austronesian language family , while many  Papuan languages  are spoken in  Western New Guinea . The official language is  Indonesian  (also known as Bahasa Indonesia) a variant of  Malay , which was used in the archipelago. It borrows heavily from local languages such as Javanese, Sundanese, Minangkabau, etc. Indonesian is primarily used in commerce, administration, education and the media, but most Indonesians  speak other languages , such as  Javanese , as their first language. Indonesian is based on the  prestige dialect  of Malay, that of the  Johor - Riau  Sultanate, which for centuries had been the  lingua franca  of the archipelago. It is the official language of Singapore, Malaysia and Brunei. Indonesian is universally taught in schools and consequently is spoken by nearly every Indonesian. It is the language of business, politics, national media, education, and academia. Indonesian was promoted by Indonesian nationalists in the 1920s, and declared the  official language  under the name Bahasa Indonesia in the proclamation of independence in 1945. Most Indonesians speak at least one of  several hundred local languages and dialects , often as their  first language . In comparison, Papua has over 270 indigenous  Papuan  and  Austronesian languages , in a region of about 2.7 million people.  Javanese  is the most widely spoken local language, as it is the language of the largest ethnic group.

While religious freedom is stipulated in the Indonesian constitution, the government officially recognises only  six religions :  Islam ,  Protestantism ,  Roman Catholicism ,  Hinduism ,  Buddhism , and  Confucianism . Indonesia is the world's most populous Muslim majority country, at 87.2% in 2010, with the majority being  Sunni Muslims  (99%). The  Shia s and  Ahmadis  respectively constitute 0.5% and 0.2% of the Muslim population. There are approximately 1 million Shia Muslims and 400,000 Ahmadi Muslims in the country which approximates to 0.5% and 0.2% of the total Muslim population. See:In 2010,  Christian s made up almost 10% of the population (7% of the total population was Protestant, 2.9% Roman Catholic), 1.7% were Hindu, and 0.9% were Buddhist or other. Most Indonesian  Hindu s are  Balinese , and most  Buddhists  in modern-day Indonesia are ethnic  Chinese . Though now minority religions, Hinduism and Buddhism remain defining influences in  Indonesian culture .  Islam  was first adopted by Indonesians in northern  Sumatra  in the 13th century, through the influence of traders, and became the country's  dominant religion  by the 16th century. Roman Catholicism  was brought to Indonesia by early Portuguese colonialists and missionaries, and the Protestant denominations are largely a result of Dutch  Reformed  and  Lutheran  missionary efforts during the country's colonial period. A large proportion of Indonesians—such as the Javanese  abangan , Balinese  Hindu s, and Dayak Christians—practice a less  orthodox ,  syncretic  form of their religion, which draws on local customs and beliefs. Most of indigenous native Indonesian beliefs could be categorised as  animism ,  shamanism  as well  ancestral worship . Examples of Indonesian native belief systems are  Sundanese   Sunda Wiwitan ,  Dayak 's  Kaharingan ,  Toraja n Aluk To Dolo,  Manusela  and  Nuaulu 's Naurus,  Batak 's  Parmalim  faith, and to some extent  Javanese   Kejawen  belief. There are also a number of indigenous deities and ancestral worship in  Kalimantan ,  Sulawesi , and  Papua .

As many other developing country, high  fertility rate  still facing the main problem of this country. Traditionally, Indonesian society has viewed children as the source of  fortune . A local saying that more children equated to more fortune and it was widely believed that the use of contraceptives contravened religious and moral values. This contributed to a very high fertility rate. Recognising that high fertility was a major factor in creating widespread poverty. Child marriage is also sustained by traditional norms. Close to 80 percent of the Indonesian population lives in the west of the country, but that segment of the population is growing at a slower pace than the rest of the country. This make a gap in term of  wealth ,  unemployment rate , and  health  between the densely populated islands like  Sumatra  and  Java , which are the economic center of Indonesia and the sparsely populated islands such as  Maluku , and  Papua  which also considered as Indonesia's disadvantaged area. The  Income inequality  is still a problem, not only effects to economy, but also social structure of Indonesia, resulting  social discrimination .  Racial discrimination  especially against  Chinese  which is still a controversial issues and still continues in Indonesia since Dutch colonialization until recent.

Education in Indonesia is compulsory for twelve years. Parents can choose between state-run, non sectarian public schools supervised by  Ministry of Education and Culture  or private or semi-private religious (usually Islamic) schools supervised and financed by the Department of Religious Affairs. The enrolment rate is 94% for primary education (2011), 75% for secondary education, and 27% for tertiary education. The literacy rate is 93% (2011). By 2014, there were 118 state universities in Indonesia. Entry to higher education depends on the nationwide entrance examination (SNMPTN and SBMPTN). According to the 2015  Times Higher Education World University Rankings , the top university in Indonesia is  University of Indonesia  (rank 310, dropped from 201 in 2009), followed by  Bandung Institute of Technology  (in the 431–460 rank range) and  Gadjah Mada University  (in the 551–600 rank range). Five other Indonesian universities, including  Airlangga University ,  Bogor Institute of Agriculture ,  Diponegoro University ,  Sepuluh Nopember Institute of Technology  and  Brawijaya University  all huddled in the 701+ range. All of educational institutions located in Java.  Andalas University  is pioneering the establishment of a leading university outside of Java.

Living in an agrarian and maritime culture the people in Indonesian's archipelago have been famous in some traditional technologies, particularly in  agriculture  and  marine . In agriculture, for instance, the people in Indonesia, and also in many other Southeast Asian countries, are famous in paddy cultivation technique namely terasering.  Bugis  and  Makassar  people in Indonesia are also well-known with their technology in making wooden sailing vessel called  pinisi boat .

In  aerospace  technology, Indonesia has a long history in developing military and small commuter aircraft as the only country in Southeast Asia to produce and develop its own aircraft, also producing aircraft components for  Boeing  and  Airbus , with its state-owned aircraft company (founded in 1976), the  Indonesian Aerospace  ( Indonesian : PT. Dirgantara Indonesia), which, with  EADS CASA  of  Spain  developed the  CN-235  aircraft, which has been exported to many countries.  B. J. Habibie , a former Indonesian president played an important role in this achievement. While active as a professor in  Germany , Habibie conducted many research assignments, producing theories on  thermodynamics , construction, and  aerodynamics , known as the Habibie Factor, Habibie Theorem, and Habibie Method respectively. Indonesia also hopes to manufacture the  South Korea n  KAI KF-X  fighter. Indonesia is also the first  developing country  to launch its own  satellite  system, known as  Palapa . Palapa is a series of communication satellite own by  Indosat . The first satellite, PALAPA A1 was first launched on July 8, 1976 Florida time, or on July 9, 1976  Western Indonesian Time  on a US rocket, Delta 2914, from the  Kennedy Space Center . As of 2016, Indonesia has launched 11 satellites to connect alongside the archipelago.

Indonesia has a well established railway industry, with its state-owned train manufacturer company, the Indonesian Railway Industry ( Indonesian : PT. Industri Kereta Api), located in  Madiun ,  East Java . Since 1982 the company has been producing passenger train wagons, freight wagons and other railway technologies and exported to many countries, such as  Malaysia  and  Bangladesh . In the 1980s an Indonesian engineer,  Tjokorda Raka Sukawati  invented a road construction technique named  Sosrobahu  which becomes famous afterwards and widely used by many countries. The technology has been exported to Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and the United States.

With an estimate of 132,700,000 users, Indonesia is one of the top ten largest countries by number of  internet  users. Indonesia is also the fourth largest countries by number of  Facebook  users and the third largest of  Twitter  users around the world. The majority of internet users in Indonesia is between 18–25 years old for 4 hours 42 minutes accessing internet everyday. Most of them accessing internet through  mobile phone  for 85% and the other use  laptop  for 32%  PC  for 14% and  tablet  for 13%. However, internet is a relatively new  communication medium  in Indonesia. Like other  countries , internet development in Indonesia just begun in the early 1990. Indonesia's first internet development story was different from other countries. It was very unique, because it was not started by government but started from little  community  called Paguyuban Network which means Network Group. Then, in the middle of 1994, IndoNet, the first commercial  Internet Service Provider , was established at  Jakarta . Since then, internet in Indonesia grown more rapidly than any other countries in the world until nowadays.

Both nature and culture are major components of Indonesian tourism. The natural heritage can boast a unique combination of a tropical climate, vast archipelago and long stretch of beaches. These natural attractions are complemented by a rich cultural heritage that reflects Indonesia's dynamic history and ethnic diversity. The ancient  Prambanan  and  Borobudur  temples,  Toraja  and  Bali , with its Hindu festivities, are some of the popular destinations for cultural tourism. Indonesia has a well-preserved natural ecosystem with rainforests that stretch over about 57% of Indonesia's land (225 million acres). Forests on Sumatra and Kalimantan are examples of popular tourist destinations, such as  Orang Utan  wildlife reserve. Moreover, Indonesia has one of longest coastlines in the world, measuring 54,716 kilometres (33,999 mi). With 20% of the world's coral reefs, over 3,000 different species of fish and 600 coral species, deep water trenches, volcanic sea mounts, World War II wrecks, and an endless variety of macro life, scuba diving in Indonesia is both excellent and inexpensive.  Bunaken National Marine Park , at the northern tip of  Sulawesi  has more than 70% of all the known fish species of the Indo-Western  Pacific Ocean . According to  Conservation International , marine surveys suggest that the marine life diversity in the  Raja Ampat Islands  is the highest recorded on Earth. Moreover, there are over 3,500  species  living in Indonesian waters, including  shark s,  dolphin s,  manta ray s,  turtle s,  morays ,  cuttlefish ,  octopus  and  scorpaenidae , compared to 1,500 on the  Great Barrier Reef . Indonesia has  [8 UNESCO World Heritage Sites](List of World Heritage Sites in Indonesia) , such as the  Komodo National Park ,  Cultural Landscape of Bali ,  Ujung Kulon National Park ,  Lorentz National Park ,  Tropical Rainforest Heritage of Sumatra , comprises three national parks on the island of Sumatra:  Gunung Leuser National Park ,  Kerinci Seblat National Park  and the  Bukit Barisan Selatan National Park ; and 18 World Heritage Sites in tentative list, such as the historic urban centres of  Jakarta Old Town ,  Sawahlunto Old Coal Mining Town ,  Semarang Old Town , as well as  Muara Takus Compound Site . The heritage tourism is focussed on specific interest on  Indonesian history , such as colonial architectural heritage of Dutch East Indies era. The activities among others are visiting museums, churches, forts and historical colonial buildings, as well as spend some nights in colonial heritage hotels. The popular heritage tourism attractions are Jakarta Old Town and the royal  Javanese courts  of  Yogyakarta ,  Surakarta  and the  Mangkunegaran . Bali  island received the Best Island award from  Travel and Leisure  in 2010. The island of Bali won because of its attractive surroundings (both mountain and coastal areas), diverse tourist attractions, excellent international and local restaurants, and the friendliness of the local people. According to BBC Travel released in 2011, Bali is one of the World's Best Islands, ranking second after  Santorini ,  Greece . Bali is a major world  surfing  destination, with popular breaks dotted across the southern coastline and around the offshore island of  Nusa Lembongan . As part of the  Coral Triangle , Bali, including  Nusa Penida , offers a wide range of dive sites with varying types of reefs. Urban tourism activities includes  shopping , sightseeing in big cities, or enjoying modern  amusement park s, resorts, spas, nightlife and entertainment.  Beautiful Indonesia Miniature Park  as well as  Ancol Dreamland  with Dunia Fantasi (Fantasy World) theme park and Atlantis Water Adventure are Jakarta's answer to Disneyland-style amusement park and water park. The capital city,  Jakarta , is a shopping hub in  Southeast Asia . The city has numerous  [shopping malls](List of shopping malls in Indonesia)  and traditional markets. With a total of 550 hectares, Jakarta has the world's largest shopping mall floor area within a single city. The annual "Jakarta Great Sale" is held every year in June and July to celebrate Jakarta's anniversary.  Bandung  is a popular shopping destination for fashion products among Malaysians and Singaporeans. Since January 2011, Wonderful Indonesia has been the  slogan  of an international marketing campaign directed by the  Indonesian Ministry of Culture and Tourism  to promote tourism. In year 2015, 10.4 million international visitors entered Indonesia, staying in hotels for an average of 8.5 nights and spending an average of US$1,190 per person during their visit, or US$140 per person per day.

Indonesia is a rich country with more than 300 ethnic groups. Each of them has it own  art ,  architecture  and housing,  cuisine , traditional dress,  festival s,  music ,  dance ,  tradition ,  ritual ,  myths ,  philosophy of life , even  language . The cultural identities developed over centuries, and influenced by  Indian ,  Arabic ,  Chinese , and  European  sources, resulting in many cultural practices being strongly influenced by a multitude of  religions , including  Hinduism ,  Buddhism ,  Confucianism ,  Islam  and  Christianity . The result is a complex and very unique cultural mixture that different from the original indigenous cultures. The fusion of Islam with Hindu in Javanese  Abangan  belief, the fusion of Hinduism, Buddhism and  animism  in  Bodha , and the fusion of Hinduism and animism in  Kaharingan . Traditional Javanese and Balinese dances, for example, contain aspects of Hindu culture and mythology, as do  wayang kulit  (shadow puppet) performances. Traditional  carpentry ,  masonry , stone and woodwork techniques and decorations are also thrived in  Indonesian vernacular architecture , with numbers of  traditional house s' styles has been developed. The traditional houses and settlements of the several hundreds ethnic groups of Indonesia are extremely varied and all have their own specific history. The  Indonesian film industry's  popularity peaked in the 1980s and dominated cinemas in Indonesia, although it declined significantly in the early 1990s. Between 2000 and 2005, the number of Indonesian films released each year has steadily increased. As of 2015, Indonesia holds  8 items of UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage , which include  wayang puppet theatre ,  kris ,  batik , education and training on making Indonesian batik,  angklung ,  saman dance ,  noken , and the three genres of traditional  Balinese dance . Batik which natives to Indonesia also was recognized by   UNESCO  as a  Masterpiece of Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity  on October 2009.

Indonesian art is various  artistic expressions  and  artwork s of the archipelagic nation of Indonesia. It is quite difficult to define Indonesian art, since the country is immensely diverse. The sprawling archipelago nation consists of 13,466 islands. Around 922 of those permanently inhabited, by over 300  ethnic groups , which speaking more than 700 living  languages . It is either work of arts produced by  its people —created by Indonesian artist, or influenced by  its culture  and traditions. Indonesian arts includes both age-old artforms developed through centuries, and recently developed  contemporary art . Despite often displaying local ingenuity, Indonesian arts also has experienced foreign exposures and influences—most notably from  India ,  Arabia ,  China  and  Europe , as the result of centuries of contacts and interactions facilitated, and often motivated, by trade. The art of  painting  is quite well-developed in  Bali , where its people are famed for their artistry. The  Balinese art  paintings tradition started as classical  Kamasan  or  Wayang  style visual narrative, derived from East Javanese visual art discovered on East Javanese  candi  bas reliefs. Balinese painting tradition are notable for its highly vigorous yet refined intricate art which resembles baroque folk art with tropical themes. Megalithic sculpture  has been discovered in several sites in Indonesia. Subsequently, tribal art has flourished within the culture of  Nias ,  Batak ,  Asmat ,  Dayak  and  Toraja . Wood and stone are common materials used as the media for sculpting among these tribes. Between 8th to 15th century, Javanese civilization has developed a refined stone sculpting art and architecture which was influenced by Hindu-Buddhist  Dharmic  civilization. The celebrated example is the temples of  Borobudur  and  Prambanan .

Architecture reflects the diversity of cultural that have shaped Indonesia as a whole. Invaders, colonisers, missionaries, merchants and traders brought cultural changes that had a profound effect on building styles and techniques. The most dominant influences on  Indonesian architecture  have traditionally been  Indian ; however, Chinese, Arab, and European architectural influences have been significant. The Indonesia traditional houses are at the centre of a web of customs, social relations, traditional laws, taboos, myths and religions that bind the villagers together. The house provides the main focus for the family and its community, and is the point of departure for many activities of its residents. Traditional houses hold a prominent position in the society, relates to its social significance. Example of Indonesian vernacular architecture including  Toraja 's  Tongkonan ,  Minangkabau 's  Rumah Gadang  and  Rangkiang , Javanese style  Pendopo  pavilion with  Joglo  style roof,  Dayak 's  longhouse s, various  Malay houses ,  Balinese houses  and  temples , and also various styles of  lumbung  (rice barns).

With more than 300  ethnic group s, Indonesia is considered as the home of world  handicraft . Every ethnic in Indonesia has it own  uniqueness ,  style , and  philosophy  of craft. Most of them are made from wooden,  bone ,  fabric ,  stone ,  paper , and other. Using hands, these natural materials were crafted into useful and  aesthetic  items. Handicraft manufacturing, unlike most other manufacturing activities, has a  social  function as well. In Indonesia, handicraft is not just a tradition; it is also an important economic sector. The handicraft industry employs thousands of people in towns and villages across the country. About half a billion dollar worth of handicraft is exported every year, and many more is consumed domestically. There are many varieties of handicraft from other regions.  West Sumatra  and  South Sumatra  are particularly noted for their songket cloths. Villages in  Nusa Tenggara  produce ikat. Provinces in  Kalimantan  (Borneo) are long known for their  basketry  and weaving using  rattan  and other natural fabrics. Wood art produced by the Asmat people of  Papua  is highly valued. Along the northern coast,  Cirebon ,  Pekalongan , and  Lasem  are batik centers. For furniture, the important cities are Cirebon (for rattan) and  Jepara  (carved wood).  Tasikmalaya  is known for embroidery.  Pasuruan  also produces  furniture  and other products and may support stores and galleries in  Bali .  Bandung  and  Surabaya , both are modern, cosmopolitan, and industrialized cities—much like Jakarta but on a lesser scale, are creative cities with a variety of innovative startups. Textiles such as  batik ,  ikat ,  ulos  and  songket  are several of many Indonesian crafts.  Batik , which is origin to Indonesia is the most remarkable as it was recognized  by   UNESCO  as a  Masterpiece of Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity  on October 2009, and has become the  national costume .

As a  [multi-diverse country](List of countries ranked by ethnic and cultural diversity level) , Indonesia having more than 300  ethnic groups  and 34 provinces, each has its own representation of traditional attire and dress from each province with its own unique and distinguished designs. Notable dress such as  Kebaya  and  Batik  both of  Javanese  from  Java ;  Ulos  of  Batak  from  North Sumatra ;  Songket  of  Malay  and  Minangkabau  from  South Sumatra  and  West Sumatra ; and  Ikat  of  Sasak  from  Lombok . Today, the most widely recognize Indonesian national costume are  Batik  and  Kebaya , although originally those costumes mainly belong within the culture of  Java  and  Bali , most prominently within  Javanese ,  Sundanese  and  Balinese  culture. National costumes are worn during official occasions as well as traditional ceremonies. The most obvious display of Indonesian national costumes can be seen by the type of costumes worn by the  President of Indonesia  and the Indonesian  first lady  in many and different types of occasions and settings, and also worn by Indonesian diplomatic officials during meeting or gala dinner.

The music of Indonesia predates historical records. Various native Indonesian tribes incorporate chants and songs accompanied with musical instruments in their rituals. Traditional Indonesian instruments include  angklung ,  kacapi suling ,  siteran ,  gong ,  gamelan ,  degung ,  gong kebyar ,  bumbung ,  talempong ,  kulintang  and  sasando . The diverse world of Indonesian music genres was the result of the musical creativity of its people, and subsequent cultural encounters with foreign musical influences into the archipelago. Next to distinctive native form of musics, several genres can trace their origins to foreign influences, such as gambus and  qasida  from Middle Eastern Islamic music, keroncong from Portuguese influences, and  dangdut —one of the most popular music genres in Indonesia—with notable Hindi music influence as well as Malay orchestras. Today, Indonesian music industry enjoys nationwide popularity. Thanks to common culture and intelligible languages between  Indonesian  and  Malay , Indonesian music enjoyed regional popularity in neighbouring countries such as Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei. However, the overwhelming popularity of Indonesian music in Malaysia had alarmed the Malaysian music industry. In 2008, Malaysian music industry demanded the restriction of Indonesian songs on Malaysian radio broadcasts.

Traditional dance  of Indonesia reflect the rich diversity of Indonesian people. The dance traditions in Indonesia; such as  Javanese ,  Sundanese ,  Minangkabau ,  Balinese   [Malays](Category:Malay dances) ,  Aceh  and many other dances traditions are age old traditions, yet also a living and dynamic traditions. Several royal houses; the  istana s and  keraton s still survived in some parts of Indonesia and become the haven of cultural conservation. The obvious difference between courtly dance and common folk dance traditions is the most evident in  Javanese dance . The palace court traditions also evident in Balinese and Malay court which usually imposed refinement and prestige. Java and Bali are more deeply rooted in their Hindu-Buddhist heritage, while Sumatran courtly culture such as the remnant of  Aceh Sultanate  and Palembang Sultanate, are more influenced by  Islamic culture . Dances in Indonesia are believed by many scholars to have had their beginning in rituals and religious worship. Such dances are usually based on rituals, like the war dances, the dance of  witch doctor s, and dance to call for rain or any agricultural related rituals such as  Hudoq  dance ritual of  Dayak people . In Bali, dances has become the integral part of Hindu Balinese rituals. Sacred ritual dances performed only in  Balinese temple s such as sacred  Sanghyang dedari  and  Barong  dance. The commoners folk dance is more concerned with social function and  entertainment  value than  ritual s. The Javanese  Ronggeng  and  Sundanese   Jaipongan  is the fine example of this common folk dance traditions. Both are social dances that are more for entertainment purpose than rituals.  Randai  is a folk theatre tradition of the  Minangkabau people  which incorporates dance, music, singing, drama and the martial art of  silat . Certain traditional folk dances has been developed into mass dance with simple but structurised steps and movements, such as  Poco-poco  dance from  Minahasa  and Sajojo dance from  Papua .

Indonesian cuisine  is one of the most vibrant and colourful cuisines in the world, full of intense flavour. It is diverse, in part because Indonesia is composed of approximately 6,000 populated islands of the total 18,000 in the world's largest archipelago, with more than  300 ethnic groups  calling Indonesia their home. Many regional cuisines exist, often based upon  indigenous culture  and foreign influences such as Chinese, European, Middle Eastern, and Indian precedents. Rice is the main  staple food  and is served with  side dish es of meat and vegetables. Spices (notably chili),  coconut milk , fish and chicken are fundamental ingredients. Some popular Indonesian dishes such as  nasi goreng ,  gado-gado ,  sate , and  soto  are  ubiquitous  in the country and considered as national dishes. The official  national dish  of Indonesia however, is  tumpeng , chosen in 2014 by  Indonesian Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy  as the dish that binds the diversity of Indonesia's various culinary traditions. Another popular Indonesian dishes like  rendang  which is one of many  Minangkabau cuisine , beside of  dendeng  and  gulai . In 2011,  rendang  was chosen as the "Worlds Most Delicious Food" that has been announced by CNN. Rendang can be made from beef that is slowly simmered with coconut milk and a mixture of lemongrass, galangal, garlic, turmeric, ginger and chilies, then left to stew for a few hours to make it tender, flavorful bovine goodness. Another fermented food such as  oncom , similar in some ways to  tempeh  but using a variety of bases (not only soy), created by different fungi, and particularly popular in  West Java .

Wayang , the Javanese, Sundanese, and Balinese  shadow puppet  theatre shows display several mythological legends such as  Ramayana  and  Mahabharata , and many more.  Wayang wong  is Javanese traditional dance drama based on wayang stories. Various Balinese dance drama also can be included within traditional form of Indonesian drama. Another form of local drama is Javanese  Ludruk  and  Ketoprak , Sundanese  Sandiwara , and Betawi  Lenong . All of these drama incorporated humor and jest, often involving audiences in their performance. Randai  is a folk theatre tradition of the  Minangkabau  people of  West Sumatra , usually performed for traditional ceremonies and festivals. It incorporates music, singing, dance, drama and the  silat  martial art, with performances often based on semi-historical Minangkabau legends and love story. Modern performing art also developed in Indonesia with their distinct style of drama. Notable theatre, dance, and drama troupe such as Teater Koma are gain popularity in Indonesia as their drama often portray social and political  satire  of Indonesian society.

Sports in Indonesia  are generally male-oriented and spectator sports are often associated with illegal gambling. The most popular sports are badminton and  football .  Indonesian players  have won the  Thomas Cup  (the world team championship of men's badminton) thirteen of the twenty-six times that it has been held since 1949, as well as numerous Olympic medals since the sport gained full Olympic status in 1992. Indonesian women have won the  Uber Cup , the female equivalent of the Thomas Cup, 3 times, in  1975 ,  1994  and  1996 .  Liga Super Indonesia  is the country's premier football club league. On the international stage,  Indonesia  experienced limited success despite being the first Asian team to qualify for the  FIFA World Cup  in  1938  as Dutch East Indies. In 1956, the football team played in the  Olympics  and played a hard-fought draw against the  Soviet Union . On the continent level, Indonesia won the bronze medal once in football in the  1958 Asian Games . Indonesia's first appearance in  Asian Cup  was back in  1996 . The Indonesian national team qualified for the Asian Cup in  2000 ,  2004  and  2007 AFC Asian Cup , however unable to move through next stage. Basketball  has a long history in Indonesia and was part of the first  Indonesian National Games  in 1948.  Boxing  is a popular combative sport spectacle in Indonesia. Some of famous Indonesian boxers are  Ellyas Pical , three times  IBF   Super flyweight  champion;  Nico Thomas ,  Muhammad Rachman , and  Chris John . For racing sport, Indonesia has  Rio Haryanto  who become the first Indonesian to compete in  Formula One . Traditional sports include  sepak takraw , and bull racing in Madura. In areas of Indonesia with a history of tribal warfare, mock fighting contests are held, such as caci in  Flores  and  pasola  in  Sumba .  Pencak Silat  is an Indonesian martial art and in 1987, became one of the sporting events in  Southeast Asian Games , with Indonesia appearing as one of the leading forces in this sport. In Southeast Asia, Indonesia is one of the major sport powerhouses by winning the Southeast Asian Games 10 times since 1977.

The first domestically produced film in Indonesia was in 1926:  Loetoeng Kasaroeng , a silent film by  Dutch  director L. Heuveldorp. This adaptation of the  Sundanese legend  was made with local actors by the NV Java Film Company in  Bandung . After independence, the film industry expanded rapidly, with six films made in 1949 rising to 58 in 1955.  Djamaluddin Malik 's Persari often emulating  American genre films  and the working practices of the Hollywood studio system, as well as remaking popular  Indian films . The  Sukarno  government used cinema for  nationalistic , anti- Western  purposes. Foreign film imports were banned. After the overthrow of Sukarno by  Suharto 's  New Order  regime, films were regulated through a  censorship  code that aimed to maintain the social order.  Usmar Ismail , a director from West Sumatra made a major imprint in Indonesian film in the 1950s and 1960s. Films made in the 1980s included Pintar-pintar Bodoh (1982), Maju Kena Mundur Kena (1984),  Nagabonar  (1987),  Catatan Si Boy  (1989), and  Warkop 's comedy films, directed by  Arizal . Actors included  Deddy Mizwar ,  Eva Arnaz ,  Meriam Bellina , and  Rano Karno . Indonesia has held annual film festivals an awards, the  Indonesian Film Festival  (Festival Film Indonesia/FFI), which has been held intermittently since 1955. This festival hands out the  Citra Award , an Indonesian counterpart of United State's  Academy Awards , the most prestigious award among Indonesian film workers. From 1973 to 1992, the festival was held annually and then discontinued until it was later revived in 2004. Under the  Reformasi  movement,  independent film making was a rebirth of the filming industry in Indonesia, where film's started addressing topics which were previously banned such as; religion, race, love and other topics.  Riri Riza  and  Mira Lesmana  were the new generation of Indonesian film figures who co-directed of Kuldesak (1999),  Petualangan Sherina  (2000),  Ada Apa dengan Cinta?  (2002),  Gie  (2005), and  Laskar Pelangi  (2008). Locally made film quality has gone up in 2012, this is attested by the international release of films such as  The Raid: Redemption , Modus Anomali, Dilema,  Lovely Man , and  Java Heat .

The oldest evidence of writing in Indonesia is a series of  Sanskrit  inscriptions dated to the 5th century. Many of Indonesia's peoples have strongly rooted  oral tradition s, which help to define and preserve their cultural identities. In written poetry and prose, a number of traditional forms dominate, mainly  syair ,  pantun ,  gurindam ,  [hikayat](List of Hikayat)  and  babad . Some of these works are Syair Raja Siak,  Syair Abdul Muluk ,  Hikayat Abdullah ,  Hikayat Bayan Budiman ,  Hikayat Hang Tuah ,  Sulalatus Salatin , and  Babad Tanah Jawi . Early modern Indonesian literature originates in Sumatran tradition.  Balai Pustaka , the government bureau for popular literature, was instituted around 1920 to promote the development of indigenous literature, it adopted Malay as the preferred common medium for Indonesia. Important figures in modern Indonesian literature include: Dutch author  Multatuli , who criticised treatment of the Indonesians under Dutch colonial rule; Sumatrans  Mohammad Yamin  and  Hamka , who were influential pre-independence nationalist writers and politicians; and proletarian writer  Pramoedya Ananta Toer , Indonesia's most famous novelist. Pramoedya earned several accolades, and was frequently discussed as Indonesia's and Southeast Asia's best candidate for a  Nobel Prize in Literature . Indonesian literature and poetry flourished even more in the first half of the 20th century.  Chairil Anwar  was considered as the greatest literary figure of Indonesia by American poet and translator,  Burton Raffel . He was among those youngsters who pioneered in changing the traditional Indonesian literature and modifying it on the lines of the newly independent country. Some of his popular poems include  [Krawang-Bekasi, Diponegoro](List of works by Chairil Anwar)  and  Aku . Other major authors include  Marah Roesli  ( Sitti Nurbaya ),  Merari Siregar  ( Azab dan Sengsara ),  Abdul Muis  ( Salah Asuhan ),  Djamaluddin Adinegoro  ( Darah Muda ),  Sutan Takdir Alisjahbana  ( Layar Terkembang ), and  Amir Hamzah  ( Nyanyi Sunyi ) whose works are among the most well known in  Maritime Southeast Asia .

Media  freedom in Indonesia increased considerably after the end of President Suharto's rule, during which the now-defunct Ministry of Information monitored and controlled domestic media, and restricted foreign media. The  TV  market includes ten national commercial networks, and provincial networks that compete with public  TVRI . Private radio stations carry their own news bulletins and foreign broadcasters supply programs. At a reported 25 million users in 2008, Internet usage was estimated at 12.5% in September 2009. More than 30 million cell phones are sold in Indonesia each year, and 27% of them are local brands.