Jeff Bezos
'Jeff Bezos' (; born 'Jeffrey Preston Jorgensen'; January 12, 1964) is an American technology entrepreneur, investor, and philanthropist. He is the founder, chairman, and chief executive officer of  Amazon.com , which became the world's largest online shopping retailer. The company began as an  Internet  merchant of books and expanded to a wide variety of products and services, most recently  video streaming  and audio streaming. Amazon.com is currently the world's largest Internet sales website on the  World Wide Web . Bezos' other diversified business interests include  aerospace  and  newspapers . He is the founder and manufacturer of  Blue Origin  (founded in 2000) with  test flights  to space beginning in 2015, and plans for commercial  suborbital   human spaceflight  beginning in 2018.  In 2013, Bezos purchased  The Washington Post  newspaper. A number of other business investments are managed through  Bezos Expeditions . The annual  Forbes ranking  for 2016 lists Bezos as the 5th wealthiest person in the world at just over $66 billion net worth.

Bezos was born Jeffrey Preston Jorgensen to Jacklyn (née Gise) and Ted Jorgensen in  Albuquerque, New Mexico . His maternal ancestors were settlers who lived in  Texas , and over the generations acquired a 25,000-acre (101 km or 39 miles) ranch near  Cotulla .  As of March 2015, Bezos was among the largest landholders in Texas.  Bezos' maternal grandfather was a regional director of the  U. S. Atomic Energy Commission  in Albuquerque. He retired early to the ranch, where Bezos spent many summers as a youth, working with him. At an early age, he displayed mechanical aptitude – as a toddler, he even dismantled his crib with a screwdriver. Bezos' mother Jacklyn was a teenager at the time of his birth. Her marriage to Jorgensen lasted a little more than a year. In April 1968 (when Jeff was four) she remarried Miguel Bezos, a  Cuban  who immigrated to the United States alone when he was 15 years old. Bezos worked his way through the  University of Albuquerque , married Jacklyn, and legally adopted his stepson Jeff, who changed his surname from Jorgensen to Bezos. After the wedding the family moved to  Houston , Texas, and Miguel became an engineer for  Exxon . The young Jeff attended  River Oaks Elementary School  in Houston from fourth to sixth grade. As a child, he spent summers working his grandfather's ranch in southern Texas. Bezos often displayed scientific interests and technological proficiency; he once rigged an electric alarm to keep his younger siblings out of his room. The family moved to  Miami, Florida , where he attended  Miami Palmetto Senior High School . While in high school, he attended the Student Science Training Program at the  University of Florida , receiving a  Silver Knight Award  in 1982. He was high school  valedictorian   and was a  National Merit Scholar . Bezos graduated  summa cum laude  and  Phi Beta Kappa  from  Princeton University  with a  Bachelor of Science in Engineering  degree in  electrical engineering  and  computer science . While at Princeton, he was also elected to  Tau Beta Pi . He served as the President of the Princeton chapter of the  Students for the Exploration and Development of Space .

After graduating from Princeton in 1986, Bezos worked on  Wall Street  in the computer science field. Then he worked on building a network for  international trade  for a company known as Fitel. He next worked at  Bankers Trust . Later on he also worked on Internet-enabled business opportunities at  D. E. Shaw & Co.

Bezos founded  Amazon.com  in 1994 after making a cross-country drive from New York to  Seattle , writing up the Amazon business plan on the way. He initially set up the company in his garage. He had left his "well-paying job" at a New York City  hedge fund  after learning "about the rapid growth in Internet use", which coincided with a  then-new U. S. Supreme Court ruling  holding that mail order companies were not required to collect sales taxes in states where they lack a physical presence."Bezos is known for his attention to business details. As described by Portfolio.com, he "is at once a happy-go-lucky mogul and a notorious  micromanager : "an executive who wants to know about everything from contract minutiae to how he is quoted in all Amazon press releases."On August 15, 2015, The New York Times wrote an article entitled "Inside Amazon: Wrestling Big Ideas in a Bruising Workplace" about Amazon's  business practice s and Bezos responded to his employees with a Sunday memo claiming it doesn't represent the company he leads and challenged its depiction as "a soulless, dystopian workplace where no fun is had and no laughter heard", and to contact him directly if true. In May 2016, Bezos sold slightly more than one million shares of his holdings in the company for $671 million, making it the largest amount of money he has ever raised in a sale of his Amazon holdings. On August 4, 2016, he sold 1,000,000 of his shares at a value of $756.7 Million.  As of September 21, 2016, Bezos owns 80.9 million shares of Amazon stock.  This represents 16.9% of all shares outstanding.  The current market value of the shares personally owned by Jeff Bezos is $62,100,000,000.00.

In 2000, Bezos founded  Blue Origin , a  human spaceflight  startup company,partially as a result of his fascination with space travel, Blue is currently building six of the vehicles to support all phases of testing and operations:  no-passenger test flights, flights with test passengers, and commercial-passenger weekly operations. In June 2016, Bezos reiterated his long term goal to see nearly all heavy-industry manufacturing factories in space as part of a wide-ranging, but rare, interview. In September 2016, he added that he hoped to colonize the solar system.

On August 5, 2013, Bezos announced his purchase of  The Washington Post  for $250 million in cash. Amazon.com is not to be involved. "This is uncharted terrain," he told the newspaper, "and it will require experimentation."  Shortly after the announcement of intent to purchase, The Washington Post published a long-form profile of Bezos on August 10, 2013. The sale closed on October 1, 2013, and Bezos's Nash Holdings LLC took control. In March 2014, Bezos made his first significant change at The Washington Post and lifted the online paywall for subscribers of some number of U. S. local newspapers including  The Dallas Morning News , the  Honolulu Star-Advertiser , and the  Minneapolis Star-Tribune . Bezos revealed in 2016 that he conducted no due diligence, a type of  offset agreement , when accepting the first offer from former The Washington Post owner,  Donald E. Graham .

Bezos was one of the first  investor s in  Google , investing $250,000 in 1998.  That $250,000 investment resulted in 3.3 million shares of Google stock. 

Companies that have been funded at least in part by Bezos Expeditions include:

Amazon has environmental initiatives for improving its internal operations and researching climate change, has used its homepage for disaster relief fundraising, supported writers, has a Wish List functionality for non-profit donations, and Amazon Smile offers a charitable donation of 0.5% on purchases of selected items. In July 2012, Bezos and his wife personally donated $2.5 million to support a  same-sex marriage referendum  in  Washington , which successfully passed. Non-profit projects funded by Bezos Expeditions include:The foundation gave $10 million in 2009 and $20 million in 2010 to the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center.  Bezos also donated $800,000 to  Worldreader , founded by a former Amazon employee.

He was named  Time  magazine's  Person of the Year  in 1999. In 2008, he was selected by  [U. S. News & World Report](U. S. News & World Report)  as one of America's best leaders. Bezos was awarded an  honorary doctorate  in Science and Technology from  Carnegie Mellon University  in 2008. In 2011,  The Economist  gave Bezos and Gregg Zehr an Innovation Award for the  Amazon Kindle . In 2012, Bezos was named Businessperson of The Year by  Fortune . He is also a member of the  Bilderberg Group  and attended the 2011 Bilderberg conference in  St. Moritz , Switzerland, and the  2013 conference  in Watford, Hertfordshire, England. He was a member of the Executive Committee of  The Business Council  for 2011 and 2012. According to  Forbes , Bezos is listed in October 2016 as the third wealthiest person in the world, with an estimated net worth of US$72 billion. He was ranked the second best CEO in the world by  Harvard Business Review , after  Steve Jobs  of  Apple . He has also figured in Fortune's list of Fifty great leaders of the world for three straight years, topping the list in 2015. In September 2016, Bezos was awarded the  Heinlein Prize for Advances in Space Commercialization  which earned him $250,000. The prize money was donated to the  Students for the Exploration and Development of Space  by Bezos.

Under Bezos' direction, Amazon has been criticized as "stingy" in its corporate giving practices. Journalist Shawn McCoy contrasted the philanthropic practices of Amazon and Bezos with the comparatively more generous  Microsoft  (also based near Seattle) and fellow billionaire  Bill Gates . Some found Bezos more akin to  Steve Jobs , who was skeptical of philanthropy and made few donations. Bezos was named World's Worst Boss by the  International Trade Union Confederation  (ITUC), at their World Congress, in May 2014. In making the award, Sharan Burrow, General Secretary of the ITUC, said "Jeff Bezos represents the inhumanity of employers who are promoting the American corporate model..."  An article in the  New York Times  described working for Bezos and Amazon in the offices as a  grueling and inhumane experience  with many employees regularly being  terminated  or quitting.

Bezos and his wife  MacKenzie  have four children.  His father, Ted Jorgensen, tried in vain to contact Bezos and be acknowledged as his father.