Johnny Depp
'John Christopher' "'Johnny'" 'Depp II' (born June 9, 1963) is an American actor, producer, and musician. He has won the  Golden Globe Award  and  Screen Actors Guild Award  for Best Actor. He rose to prominence on the 1980s television series  21 Jump Street , becoming a  teen idol . Depp has taken on the task of challenging himself to portray "larger-than-life" roles, starting with a supporting role in  Oliver Stone 's Vietnam War film  Platoon  in 1986, then playing the title character in the romantic dark fantasy  Edward Scissorhands  (1990). He later found box office success in the fantasy adventure film  Sleepy Hollow  (1999), the fantasy swashbuckler film  Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl  (2003) and its  sequels , the musical adventure film  Charlie and the Chocolate Factory  (2005), the fantasy film  Alice in Wonderland  (2010) and voicing the title character in the animated action comedy western  Rango  (2011). He has collaborated on nine films with director, producer, and friend  Tim Burton . Depp is regarded as one of the world's biggest film stars. He has gained worldwide critical acclaim for his portrayals of such people as screenwriter-director  Ed Wood  in  Ed Wood , undercover FBI agent  Joseph D. Pistone  in  Donnie Brasco , "gonzo" journalist  Raoul Duke  in  Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas , cocaine kingpin  George Jung  in  Blow , author  J. M. Barrie  in   Finding Neverland , the  Depression-era  outlaw  John Dillinger  in  Michael Mann 's  Public Enemies , and the Boston gangster  Whitey Bulger  in  Black Mass . Films featuring Depp have  grossed  over $3.1 billion at the United States box office and over $7.6 billion worldwide. His most commercially successful films are the  Pirates of the Caribbean  films, which have grossed $3 billion;  Alice in Wonderland , which grossed $1 billion; Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, which grossed $474 million; and  The Tourist , which grossed $278 million worldwide. Depp has been nominated for major acting awards, including three nominations for  Academy Award for Best Actor . Depp won the  Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy  for  Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street  and the  Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role  for  Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl . He has been listed in the 2012  Guinness World Records  as the highest paid actor, with earnings of $75 million. Depp was inducted as a  Disney Legend  in 2015.

Depp was born in  Owensboro, Kentucky , the youngest of four children of Betty Sue Palmer (née Wells; 1935–2016), a waitress, and John Christopher Depp (born 1938), a civil engineer. Depp is of mostly English ancestry, with some ancestors from elsewhere in Europe. He is descended from a French  Huguenot  immigrant, Pierre Deppe or Dieppe, who settled in  Virginia  around 1700. He is also of 3/2048 African descent, as he descends twice over from an African slave whose biracial daughter,  Elizabeth Key Grinstead , was the first woman of  Sub-Saharan African  ancestry in North America to sue for her freedom from slavery and win (in 1655). Depp is a 20th cousin of  Elizabeth II . Depp moved frequently during his childhood. He and his siblings lived in more than 20 different places, eventually settling in  Miramar, Florida  in 1970. Depp's parents divorced in 1978 when he was 15.  Depp and his wife divorced in 1985.

Depp's first film role was in the horror film  A Nightmare on Elm Street  (1984), in which he played the boyfriend of heroine  Nancy Thompson  ( Heather Langenkamp ) and one of  Freddy Krueger 's victims.  He accepted this role to work with actor  Frederic Forrest , who inspired him. Despite his success, Depp felt that the series "forced [him] into the role of product." He subsequently decided to appear only in films that he felt were right for him. Depp's first film release in 1990 was  John Waters '  Cry-Baby , a musical comedy set in the 1950s. Although it was not a box office success upon its initial release, over the years it has gained a  cult classic  status. Depp's second 1990 film was  Tim Burton 's film  Edward Scissorhands , in which he played the title character opposite  Dianne Wiest  and  Winona Ryder . It was a critical and commercial success that established him as leading Hollywood actor and began his long association with Burton. Producer  Scott Rudin  has stated that "basically Johnny Depp is playing Tim Burton in all his movies"; although Burton disapproved of the comment, Depp agrees with it. In his introduction to Burton on Burton, a book of interviews with the director, Depp called Burton "... a brother, a friend, ... and [a] brave soul". Depp had no film releases in the following two years, with the exception of a brief cameo in  Freddy's Dead: The Final Nightmare  (1991), the sixth installment in the  A Nightmare of Elm Street  franchise. He appeared in three films in 1993. In the romantic comedy  Benny and Joon , he played an eccentric and illiterate silent film fan who befriends a mentally ill woman and her brother; it became a  sleeper hit . He then starred alongside  Leonardo DiCaprio  and  Juliette Lewis  in  Lasse Hallström 's  What's Eating Gilbert Grape , a drama about a dysfunctional family. In his review of the film, Todd McCarthy of  Variety  said that "Depp manages to command center screen with a greatly affable, appealing characterization." Depp's final 1993 release was  Emir Kusturica 's  surrealist  comedy-drama  Arizona Dream , which opened to positive reviews.

In 1994, Depp reunited with director Tim Burton, playing the title role in  Ed Wood , a biographical film about one of history's most inept film directors. Depp later stated that he was at the time depressed about films and filmmaking, but that "within 10 minutes of hearing about the project, I was committed." He found that the role gave him a "chance to stretch out and have some fun" and that working with  Martin Landau , who played  Bela Lugosi , "rejuvenated my love for acting". Ed Wood received critical acclaim, with  Janet Maslin  of  The New York Times  writing that Depp had "proved himself as an established, certified great actor" and "captured all the can-do optimism that kept Ed Wood going, thanks to an extremely funny ability to look at the silver lining of any cloud." Depp was nominated for  Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy  for his performance. The following year, Depp starred in three films. He played opposite  Marlon Brando  in the box-office hit  Don Juan DeMarco , as a man who believes he is  Don Juan , the world's greatest lover. He then starred in  Jim Jarmusch 's  Dead Man , a  Western  shot entirely in  black-and-white ; it was not a commercial success and had mixed critical reviews. Depp's final film of the year was in the financial and critical failure  Nick of Time , a thriller in which he played an accountant who is told to kill a politician to save his kidnapped daughter. In 1997, Depp starred alongside  Al Pacino  in the crime drama  Donnie Brasco , directed by  Mike Newell . He portrayed  Joseph D. Pistone , an undercover FBI Agent who assumes the name 'Donnie Brasco' in order to infiltrate  the mafia  in New York City. To prepare for the role, Depp spent time with the real-life Joe Pistone, on whose memoirs the film was based. Donnie Brasco was a commercial and critical success, and is considered to contain one of Depp's finest performances. In 1997, Depp also debuted as a director and screenwriter with  The Brave . He starred in it as a poor  Native American  man, who accepts a proposal from a wealthy man, played by Marlon Brando, to appear in a  snuff film  in exchange for money for his family. Depp was a fan and friend of writer  Hunter S. Thompson , and played his alter ego  Raoul Duke  in  Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas  (1998),  Terry Gilliam 's film adaptation of Thompson's pseudobiographical  novel of the same name . Depp's next venture with Burton was the period film  Sleepy Hollow  (1999), in which he played  Ichabod Crane  opposite  Christina Ricci  and  Christopher Walken . For his performance, Depp took inspiration from  Angela Lansbury ,  Roddy McDowall  and  Basil Rathbone . He stated that he "always thought of Ichabod as a very delicate, fragile person who was maybe a little too in touch with his feminine side, like a frightened little girl."

Depp has generally chosen roles which he found interesting, rather than those he thought would succeed at the box office. Critics have often described Depp's characters as "iconic loners". Depp has referred to some of his less-successful films as "studio-defined failures" and "box office poison", and said that he thought the studios neither understood the films nor did a good job of marketing them. In 2003, Depp starred in the  Walt Disney Pictures  adventure film  Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl , which was a major box office success. He earned widespread acclaim for his comic performance as pirate  Captain Jack Sparrow , and received a nomination for the  Academy Award for Best Actor . Depp has said that Sparrow is "definitely a big part of me", and that he modeled the character after  The Rolling Stones  guitarist  Keith Richards  and cartoon skunk  Pepé Le Pew . Studio executives had at first been ambivalent about Depp's portrayal, but the character became popular with audiences. According to a survey taken by  Fandango , Depp was a major draw for audiences. Depp was again nominated for the Best Actor Academy Award for his performance as Scottish author  J. M. Barrie  in the film  Finding Neverland  (2004). The following year he starred as  Willy Wonka  in  Charlie and the Chocolate Factory , which reunited him with director Tim Burton, with whom he had not collaborated since Sleepy Hollow. The film was a box office success and had a positive critical reception, with Depp being nominated for the  Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy . Chocolate Factory was followed by another Burton project, stop-motion animation  Corpse Bride  (2005), in which Depp voiced the character Victor Van Dort. Depp reprised the role of Jack Sparrow in the Pirates sequels  Dead Man's Chest  (2006) and  At World's End  (2007), both of which were major box office successes. He also voiced the character in the video game  Pirates of the Caribbean: The Legend of Jack Sparrow . In 2007, Depp also collaborated with Burton for their sixth film together, this time playing murderous barber  Sweeney Todd  in the musical  Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street  (2007). Burton had first given him an original cast recording of the  1979 stage musical  in 2000, and although not a fan of the musical genre, Depp had grown to like the tale's treatment. He cited  Peter Lorre  in  Mad Love  (1935) as his main influence for the role. Although he had performed in musical groups, Depp was initially unsure that he would be able to perform the role, which required him to sing. He recorded  demos  and worked with Bruce Witkin to shape his vocals without a qualified voice coach. In the DVD Reviews section,  Entertainment Weekly s Chris Nashawaty gave the film an A minus, stating, "Depp's soaring voice makes you wonder what other tricks he's been hiding ... Watching Depp's barber wield his razors ... it's hard not to be reminded of Edward Scissorhands frantically shaping hedges into animal topiaries 18 years ago ... and all of the twisted beauty we would've missed out on had [Burton and Depp] never met." Depp won the  Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy  for the role, and was nominated for the third time for the  Academy Award for Best Actor . In director Terry Gilliam's 2009 film  The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus , Depp,  Jude Law  and  Colin Farrell  each played the character initially portrayed by their friend  Heath Ledger , who died before the film was completed. All three actors gave their salaries to Ledger's daughter Matilda. The next Depp-Burton collaboration was  Alice in Wonderland  (2010), in which he played the  Mad Hatter  alongside  Helena Bonham Carter ,  Anne Hathaway  and  Alan Rickman . The following year saw the release of the fourth installment in the Pirates series,  On Stranger Tides  (2011), which was again a box office success. Depp also voiced the title character, a lizard, in the animated film  Rango  (2011), and returned to Hunter S. Thompson's work with a  film adaptation  of the novel  The Rum Diary , which also became the first project undertaken by his production company, Infinitum Nihil. Depp next starred in the Burton-directed  Dark Shadows  (2012) alongside fellow Tim Burton regular Helena Bonham Carter, as well as  Michelle Pfeiffer  and  Eva Green . The film was based on a gothic soap opera  of the same name , which had aired in 1966–1971 and had been one of his favorites as a child. Depp and  Graham King  produced the film with David Kennedy. In 2012, Depp and his 21 Jump Street co-stars  Peter DeLuise  and  Holly Robinson  briefly reprised their roles in cameo appearances in the series'  2012 feature film adaptation , which featured a much more comedic tone than the series. Depp starred as  Tonto  in  The Lone Ranger  (2013), opposite  Armie Hammer  as the title character. He appeared in a minor supporting role as  The Wolf  in  film adaptation  of the musical  Into the Woods  in 2014. Depp played convicted  Boston  crime boss  Whitey Bulger  in director  Scott Cooper 's  Black Mass  (2015), which earned him his third nomination for the  Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role . In 2016, Depp played businessman and United States presidential candidate  Donald Trump  in a  Funny or Die  satire film entitled  Donald Trump's The Art of the Deal: The Movie . He earned praise for the role, with a headline from  [The A. V. Club](The A. V. Club)  declaring "Who knew Donald Trump was the comeback role Johnny Depp needed?" The same year, Depp reprised the role of the Mad Hatter in  Alice Through the Looking Glass , the sequel to Alice in Wonderland, which was released in May.

Depp had a cameo appearance in 2014 production of  London Fields , which remains unreleased. Depp also will reprise his role as Captain Jack Sparrow in the 2017 release of  Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales . Depp stated in a  BBC radio  interview on July 29, 2013 that he hopes to be involved with "quieter things" at some point in the near future, implying that he will retire from acting. Depp explained in further detail during the interview: "I wouldn't say I'm dropping out any second, but I would say it's probably not too far away. When you add up the amount of dialogue that you say per year and you realise that you've said written words more than you've had a chance to say your own words, you start thinking about that as an insane option for a human being."In February of 2016, it was announced that he was cast as  Dr. Jack Griffin / The Invisible Man  in  Universal Studios ' upcoming shared film universe, the  Universal Monsters Cinematic Universe , a rebooted version of their  classic Universal Monsters franchise . Depp will portray the character throughout the series' installments, as well as in the as-of-yet  Untitled Invisible Man film . It is intended to be a reboot of  The Invisible Man , with  Ed Solomon ,  Alex Kurtzman  and  Chris Morgan  attached as screenwriter, and co-producers, respectively. In October 2016, Johnny Depp was cast in the planned sequel of the film  Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them , and rumors immediately began to circulate who he would play. Later that month it was revealed that he had been cast to play  Gellert Grindelwald , and will play a major role in the sequels. The character is a former close friend to  Albus Dumbledore  in their youth, and an extremely dangerous dark wizard; second only to  Tom Riddle / Lord Voldemort . Depp made a cameo in the first film, marking his first on-screen appearance as Grindelwald.

In 2004, Depp formed his production company  Infinitum Nihil  to develop projects where he will serve as actor and/or producer. Depp is the founder and CEO, while his sister, Christi Dembrowski, serves as president. The company's first production came in 2011 with  The Rum Diary , adapted from the  novel of the same name  by  Hunter S. Thompson . The film is written and directed by  Bruce Robinson . Also in 2011,  Hugo , directed by  Martin Scorsese , was released.  Dark Shadows , directed by  Tim Burton , was released in 2012.

Depp played  slide guitar  on the  Oasis  song "Fade In-Out" (from  Be Here Now , 1997), as well as on "Fade Away (Warchild Version)" (B-side of the " Don't Go Away " single). He also played acoustic guitar in the film  Chocolat  and on the soundtrack to  Once Upon a Time in Mexico . He is a friend of  The Pogues '  Shane MacGowan , and performed on MacGowan's first solo album. He was also a member of  P , a group featuring  Butthole Surfers  singer  Gibby Haynes ,  Red Hot Chili Peppers  bassist  Flea  and  Sex Pistols  guitarist  Steve Jones . He has appeared in  Tom Petty & The Heartbreakers ' music video " Into the Great Wide Open " and  The Lemonheads ' " It's a Shame About Ray " music video. He made a cameo as the  Mad Hatter  in the music video for  Avril Lavigne 's " Alice " in 2010. He performed lead guitar and drums for a cover of  Carly Simon 's " You're So Vain ", which appeared as a bonus track on  Marilyn Manson 's 2012 album  Born Villain , also performing live with  Marilyn Manson  at the Revolver Golden Gods Awards 2012, performing several songs with Manson. He also appeared in the music video of "My Valentine" from the album  Kisses on the Bottom  by  Paul McCartney  released in February 2012, along with  Natalie Portman . Depp traded licks with  Joe Perry  on "The Brooklyn Shuffle", a song from  Steve Hunter  and  The Manhattan Blues Project , which was scheduled for release on April 30, 2013. In 2014, Depp played electric guitar on the "Kansas City" track of  Lost on the River , the  Bob Dylan  lyrics collaboration album by  The New Basement Tapes . He filled in for  Elvis Costello , who could not attend a recording session because of a previously scheduled concert with  The Roots  in Las Vegas. In 2015, Depp formed a  supergroup  with Alice Cooper and Joe Perry called  Hollywood Vampires . They released their self-titled debut studio album on September 11 featuring eleven classic rock  covers , two new songs (written primarily by Depp), and a narrative introduction by the late  Christopher Lee . Depp appeared onstage playing guitar with the group, performing live dates at  L. A. 's  Roxy Theatre  and at Brazil's  Rock in Rio  festival in September. Depp has performed at London's  100 Club  with  Alice Cooper , where they played " I'm Eighteen " and " School's Out ".

Depp and Paradis grew grapes and had wine making facilities in their vineyard in  Plan-de-la-Tour  north of  Saint-Tropez . Along with  Sean Penn ,  John Malkovich  and  Mick Hucknall , Depp co-owned the French restaurant-bar  Man Ray , located near the  Champs-Élysées  in Paris.

In July 2012, Depp announced he would be co-editor, alongside  Douglas Brinkley , of folk singer  Woody Guthrie 's unpublished novel House of Earth. The book was published in 2013.

Depp married makeup artist Lori Anne Allison from December 20, 1983; they divorced in 1985. He was later successively engaged to actresses  Jennifer Grey  and  Sherilyn Fenn  in the late 1980s before proposing in 1990 to his  Edward Scissorhands  co-star  Winona Ryder , for whom he tattooed "WINONA FOREVER" on his right arm. From 1994 until 1998, he was in a relationship with English supermodel  Kate Moss . Following his breakup from Moss, Depp began a relationship with French actor and singer  Vanessa Paradis , whom he met while filming  The Ninth Gate  in France in 1998. They have two children, daughter  Lily-Rose Melody Depp  (born 1999), and son John "Jack" Christopher Depp III (born 2002). Depp stated that having children has given him "real foundation, a real strong place to stand in life, in work, in everything ... You can't plan the kind of deep love that results in children. Fatherhood was not a conscious decision. It was part of the wonderful ride I was on. It was destiny. All the math finally worked." In 2007, Depp's daughter was hospitalized at the  Great Ormond Street Hospital  in London due to a serious  E. coli  infection, which resulted in temporary  kidney failure . To show his gratitude for her recovery, Depp visited the hospital in November 2007, dressed in his Captain Jack Sparrow outfit, and spent four hours reading stories to the children. He also donated £1 million to the hospital the following year. Depp and Paradis announced their separation in June 2012. Depp subsequently began dating actor and model  Amber Heard , whom he had met on the set of The Rum Diary in 2011. They were married in a private civil ceremony at their home in Los Angeles in February 2015.  In December 2016, she filed a Request for Order at the  Los Angeles Superior Court , as Depp had failed to fulfill the requirements of the settlement.

Depp was arrested in  Vancouver  in 1989 for assaulting a security guard after the police were called to end a loud party at his hotel room. He was also arrested in New York City in 1994 after causing significant damage to his room at  The Mark  hotel, where he was staying with Moss. The charges were dropped against him after he agreed to pay $9,767 in damages. Depp was arrested again in 1999 for brawling with paparazzi outside a restaurant while dining in London with Paradis. In 2012, disabled  UC Irvine  medical professor Robin Eckert sued Depp and three security firms, claiming to have been attacked by his bodyguards at a concert in Los Angeles in 2011. During the incident, she was allegedly hand-cuffed and dragged 40 feet across the floor, resulting in injuries including a dislocated elbow. She argued in court that as the security guards' direct manager, Depp failed to intervene, even though he did not actively take part in the battery. In October 2012, it was decided that Eckert could seek compensation and punitive damages from Depp, with a trial date set for August 12, 2013. 

Depp stated to the German magazine  Stern  in 2003 that "America is dumb, is something like a dumb puppy that has big teeth—that can bite and hurt you, aggressive." Although he later asserted that the magazine misquoted him and his words were taken out of context, Stern stood by its story, as did  CNN .com in its coverage of the interview. CNN added his remark that he would like his children "to see America as a toy, a broken toy. Investigate it a little, check it out, get this feeling and then get out." The July 17, 2006 edition of  Newsweek  reprinted the "dumb puppy" quotation, verbatim, in the context of a Letter to the Magazine. Depp has also disagreed with subsequent media reports that perceived him as a "European wannabe", saying that he liked the anonymity of living in France while in a  relationship with Paradis and his simpler life there. Depp became a U. S. resident again in 2011, because France wanted him to become a permanent resident, which he said would require him to pay income tax in both countries. On the October 16, 2011 episode of  Larry King Live , when asked if he had faith, Depp replied, "Yes. I have faith in my kids. And I have—I have faith, you know, that as long as you keep moving forward, just keep walking forward, things will be all right, I suppose, you know. Faith in terms of religion, I don't—religion is not my specialty, you know."

In interviews in 2002 and 2011, Depp stated that he "guesses" he has  Native American  ancestry, and that his "great-grandmother was quite a bit of Native American, she grew up  Cherokee  or maybe  Creek Indian ." He has cited family stories and Kentucky lore among non-Natives, rather than any evidence, for this belief. Depp's claims came under question when  Indian Country Today Media Network  stated that Depp has never inquired about his heritage nor does the  Cherokee Nation  recognize him as a member. This has led to criticism from the Native community, including of his choice to portray Tonto, a Native American character, in The Lone Ranger (2013). Critical response to his claims from the Native community also included satirical portrayals of Depp by Native comedians. Depp was adopted as an honorary son by  LaDonna Harris , a member of the  Comanche Nation , on May 22, 2012, making him an honorary member of Harris' family, but not a member of the tribe.