Lost (TV series)
'Lost' is an American television drama series that originally aired on the  American Broadcasting Company  (ABC) from September 22, 2004, to May 23, 2010, over  [six seasons](List of Lost episodes) , comprising a total of 121 episodes. Lost is a drama series containing elements of science fiction and the supernatural. It follows the survivors of the crash of a commercial passenger jet, flying between Sydney and Los Angeles, on a mysterious tropical island somewhere in the South Pacific Ocean. The story is told in a heavily serialized manner. Episodes typically feature a primary storyline set on the island, augmented by  flashback  or  flashforward  sequences which provide additional insight into the involved character(s).Lost was created by  Jeffrey Lieber ,  J. J. Abrams  and  Damon Lindelof , who share story-writing credits for  the pilot episode , which Abrams directed. Throughout the show's run, Lindelof and  Carlton Cuse  served as  showrunner s and  head writer s, working together with a large number of other executive producers and writers. Due to its large  ensemble cast  and the cost of filming primarily on location in  Oahu , Hawaii, the series was one of the most expensive on television, with the pilot alone costing over $14 million. The  fictional universe  and  mythology of Lost  are expanded upon by a number of related media, most importantly, a series of short mini-episodes called  Missing Pieces , and a 12-minute  epilogue  titled " The New Man in Charge ."Having achieved both wide acclaim and commercial success throughout its original run, Lost has been consistently ranked by critics as one of the  [greatest television dramas of all time](List of television series considered the best) . The first season garnered an estimated average of 16 million viewers per episode on ABC. During its sixth and final season, the show averaged over 11 million U. S. viewers per episode. Lost was the recipient of  [hundreds of industry award nominations](List of awards and nominations received by Lost)  throughout its run and won numerous of these awards, including the  Emmy Award  for  Outstanding Drama Series  in 2005, Best American Import at the  British Academy Television Awards  in 2005, the  Golden Globe Award  for  Best Drama  in 2006, and a  Screen Actors Guild Award  for Outstanding Ensemble in a Drama Series. Lost was declared the highest-rated show for the first ten years of  IMDb.com  Pro (2002–2012).

Season 1  begins with the aftermath of a plane crash, which leaves the surviving passengers of Oceanic Airlines Flight 815 on what seems to be an uninhabited tropical island.  Jack Shephard , a doctor, becomes their leader. Their survival is threatened by a number of mysterious entities, including polar bears, an unseen creature that roams the jungle (the "Smoke Monster"), and the island's malevolent inhabitants known as  ["The Others"](List of Lost characters) . They encounter a French woman named  Danielle Rousseau , who was shipwrecked on the island 16 years before the main story and is desperate for news of a daughter named Alex. They also find a mysterious metal hatch buried in the ground. While two survivors, Locke and Boone, try to force the hatch open, four others, Michael, Jin, Walt, and Sawyer attempt to leave on a raft that they have built. Meanwhile,  flashback s centered on individual survivors detail their lives prior to the plane crash.

Season 2  follows the growing conflict between the survivors and the Others and continues the theme of the clash between faith and science, while resolving old mysteries and posing new ones. The four survivors in the raft are ambushed by the Others, and they take  Walt ,  Michael 's son. The survivors are forced to return to the island, where they find the tail-section survivors (the "Tailies"). A power struggle between Jack and  John Locke  over control of the guns and medicine located in the hatch develops, resolved in " The Long Con " by  Sawyer  when he gains control of them. The hatch is revealed to be a research station built by the  Dharma Initiative , a scientific research project that involved conducting experiments on the island decades earlier. A man named  Desmond Hume  had been living in the hatch for three years, pushing a button every 108 minutes to prevent a catastrophic event from occurring. To recover his son, Michael betrays the survivors and Jack, Sawyer, and  Kate  are captured. Michael is given a boat and leaves the island with his son, while John destroys the computer in the hatch, and so an electromagnetic event shakes the island. This causes the island to be detected in the exterior world, and it is revealed that a similar event caused the breakup of the plane.

In  Season 3 , the crash survivors learn more about the Others and their long history on the mysterious island, along with the fate of the Dharma Initiative. The leader of the Others,  Benjamin Linus , is introduced as well as defections from both sides pave the way for conflict between the two.  Time travel  elements also begin to appear in the series, as Desmond is forced to turn the fail-safe key in the hatch to stop the electromagnetic event, and this sends his mind eight years to the past. When he returns to the present, he is able to see the future. Kate and Sawyer escape the Others, while Jack stays after Ben promises that Jack will be able to leave the island in a submarine if he operates on Ben, who has cancer. Jack does, but the submarine is destroyed by John. Jack is left behind with  Juliet , an Other, who also seeks to leave the island, while John joins the Others. A helicopter crashes near the island, in which Naomi arrives, who says her freighter, Kahana, is near and was sent by  Penelope Widmore , Desmond's ex-girlfriend. Desmond has a vision in which  Charlie  will drown after shutting down a signal that prevents communication with the exterior world. His vision comes true, but Charlie speaks with Penelope, who says she does not know any Naomi. Before drowning, Charlie writes on his hand "Not Penny's Boat" so Desmond can read it. Meanwhile, the survivors make contact with a rescue team aboard the freighter. In the  season's finale , apparent flashbacks show a depressed Jack going to an unknown person's funeral. In the final scene, these are revealed to be "flash forwards", and Kate and Jack are revealed to have escaped the island. Jack, however, is desperate to go back.

Season 4  focuses on the survivors dealing with the arrival of people from the freighter, who have been sent to the island to reclaim it from Benjamin. "Flash forwards" continue, in which it is seen how six survivors live their lives after escaping the island, and are dubbed the "Oceanic Six." The "Oceanic Six" are Jack, Kate, Hurley, Sayid, Sun, and Aaron. In the present, four members of the freighter arrive and team up with the survivors to escape the island, since the people of the freighter have orders to kill everyone who stays. Meanwhile, Ben travels with John to see  Jacob , the island's leader. John enters his house but finds Jack's dead father,  Christian , who says he can speak on Jacob's behalf, and orders John to "move" the island. Ben takes John to an underground station in which time travel was researched. John becomes the new leader of the Others, while Ben moves the island by turning a giant frozen wheel, after which he is transported to the  Sahara . The six survivors escape in a helicopter as they watch the island disappear and are subsequently rescued by Penelope. In the season finale, it is revealed that the funeral Jack went to in the "flash forwards" was John Locke's, who had been seeking out the Oceanic Six in his efforts to convince them to return to the island.

Season 5  follows two timelines. The first timeline takes place on the island where the survivors who were left behind erratically jump forward and backward through time. In one of these time periods, John speaks with  Richard Alpert , one of the Others, who says that to save the island, he must bring everyone back. John goes to the same underground station Ben went to. After moving the wheel himself, John is transported to the Sahara in 2007, as the time shifts on the island stop and the survivors are stranded with the  Dharma Initiative  in 1974. In 2007, John contacts the Oceanic Six, but no one wants to return. The last one of the Oceanic Six he finds is a depressed Jack. John tells Jack his father is alive on the island. This seriously affects Jack, and he begins taking flights, hoping to crash on the island again. Ben finds John and kills him. After John's death, the Oceanic Six are told to board the Ajira Airways Flight 316 to return to the island and in order to go back, they have to take John Locke's body in the plane. They take the flight, but some land in 1977, in which they meet with the other survivors who are now part of the Dharma Initiative, and others land in 2007. The survivors in 1977 are told by  Daniel Faraday  that if they detonate a nuclear bomb at the hatch's construction site, the electromagnetic energy below it will be negated, and, thus, the hatch would never be built and, thus, their future could be changed. In 2007, John Locke apparently comes back to life. He instructs Richard Alpert to speak with a time-traveling John and tell him that he must bring everyone back to the island. After this, he goes to speak with Jacob. The season finale reveals that John Locke is still dead and another entity has taken over his form just to make Ben kill Jacob. In 1977, Juliet detonates the fission core taken from the hydrogen bomb.

Season 6, the final , follows two timelines. In the first timeline, the survivors are sent to the present day, as the death of Jacob allows for his brother, the  Man in Black , the human alter ego of the  Smoke Monster , to take over the island. Having assumed the form of John Locke, the Smoke Monster seeks to escape the island and forces a final war between the forces of good and evil. The second timeline, called "flash-sideways" narrative, follows the lives of the main characters in a setting where Oceanic 815 never crashed, though additional changes are revealed as other characters are shown living completely different lives than they did. In the final episodes, a  flashback to the distant past  shows the origins of the island's power and of the conflict between Jacob and the Man in Black, who are revealed to be twin brothers, with Jacob desperate to keep his brother from leaving the island after he is transmogrified by the power of the island and becomes the smoke monster. In this season, we finally discover Jacob's machinations: everyone was pushed by fate and his manipulation to be on the Oceanic flight as many of the members of the flight were deemed "candidates" by Jacob to be the new protector of the island after his passing. The Man in Black's mission since the beginning of the series: kill all of the candidates, thereby allowing him to leave the island once and for all. The ghost of Jacob appears to the last-of-the-surviving candidates, and Jack is appointed as the new protector. Jack catches up with The Man In Black, who says that he wants to go to the "heart of the island" to turn it off and, therefore, finally leave the island. They reach the place, but after doing this, The Man In Black becomes mortal. The Man In Black is killed by Kate, but Jack is seriously injured.  Hurley , one of the survivors, becomes the new caretaker of the island. Several of the survivors die in the conflict or stay on the island, and the remaining escape in the Ajira Plane once and for all. Jack returns to the "heart of the island" and turns it on again, saving it. Hurley, as the new protector, asks Ben to help him in his new job, which he agrees. After having saved the island, Jack dies peacefully in the same place in which he woke up when he arrived on the island. The  series finale  reveals that the flash-sideways timeline is actually a form of limbo in the afterlife, where some of the survivors and other characters from the island are reunited after having died. In the last scene, the survivors are all reunited in a church where they "move on" together.

Episodes of Lost include a number of mysterious elements ascribed to science fiction or supernatural phenomena. The creators of the series refer to these elements as composing the  mythology  of the series, and they formed the basis of fan speculation. The show's mythological elements include a  "Smoke Monster"  that roams the island, a mysterious group of inhabitants whom the survivors called " The Others ", a scientific organization called the  Dharma Initiative  that placed several research stations on the island, a  sequence of numbers  that frequently appears in the lives of the characters in the past, present, and future, and personal connections ( synchronicity ) between the characters of which they are often unaware. At the heart of the series is a complex and cryptic storyline, which spawned numerous questions and discussions among viewers. Encouraged by Losts writers and stars, who often interacted with fans online, viewers and TV critics alike took to widespread theorizing in an attempt to unravel the mysteries. Theories mainly concerned the nature of the island, the origins of the "Monster" and the "Others", the meaning of the numbers, and the reasons for both the crash and the survival of some passengers. Several of the more common fan theories were discussed and rejected by the show's creators, the most common being that the survivors of Oceanic flight 815 are dead and in  purgatory . Lindelof rejected speculation that  spaceships  or  aliens  influenced the events on the island or that everything seen was a fictional reality taking place in someone's mind. Carlton Cuse dismissed the theory that the island was a reality TV show and the castaways unwitting housemates, and Lindelof many times refuted the theory that the "Monster" was a  nanobot  cloud similar to the one featured in  Michael Crichton 's novel  Prey  (which happened to share the protagonist's name, Jack).

There are several recurring elements and  motifs  on Lost, which generally have no direct effect on the story itself but expand the show's literary and philosophical  subtext . These elements include frequent appearances of black and white, which reflect the  dualism  within characters and situations; as well as rebellion in almost all characters, especially Kate;  dysfunctional family  situations (especially ones that revolve around the fathers of many characters), as portrayed in the lives of nearly all the main characters; apocalyptic references, including Desmond's pushing the button to forestall the end of the world; coincidence versus fate, revealed most apparently through the juxtaposition of the characters Locke and Mr. Eko; conflict between science and faith, embodied by the leadership tug-of-war between Jack and Locke and their stark disagreements on subjects such as the hatch, the button, and leaving the island; the struggle between good and evil, shown by the relationship between Jacob and the Man in Black, several times by Locke using symbols such as his  backgammon  set, also the white and black rocks that the  Man in Black  referred to as an "inside joke"; and references to numerous works of literature, including mentions and discussions of particular novels. One notable reference to a novel is  John Steinbeck 's  Of Mice and Men , usually when Sawyer is seen reading it or referencing it. There are also many allusions in characters' names to famous historical thinkers and writers, such as  Ben Linus  (after chemist  Linus Pauling ), John Locke (after the  philosopher ) and his alias  Jeremy Bentham  (after the  philosopher ),  Danielle Rousseau  (after philosopher  Jean-Jacques Rousseau ),  Desmond David Hume  (after philosopher  David Hume ), Juliet's ex-husband (after philosopher  Edmund Burke ),  Mikhail Bakunin  (after the  anarchist philosopher ), Daniel Faraday (after physicist  Michael Faraday ),  Eloise Hawking  (after physicist  Stephen Hawking ), George Minkowski (after mathematician  Hermann Minkowski ),  Richard Alpert  (the birth name of spiritual teacher  Ram Dass ), Boone Carlyle (after Daniel Boone, American pioneer), and  Charlotte Staples Lewis  (after author Clive Staples Lewis  C. S. Lewis ).

Of the 324 people on board  Oceanic Flight 815 , there are 70 initial survivors (as well as one dog) spread across the three sections of the plane crash. Although a large cast made Lost more expensive to produce, the writers benefited from added flexibility in story decisions. According to series executive producer Bryan Burk, "You can have more interactions between characters and create more diverse characters, more back stories, more  love triangle s."Lost was planned as a multicultural show with an international cast. The initial season had 14 regular speaking roles that received star  billing .  Matthew Fox  played the protagonist, a troubled surgeon named  Jack Shephard .  Evangeline Lilly  portrayed fugitive  Kate Austen .  Jorge Garcia  played  Hugo "Hurley" Reyes , an unlucky lottery winner.  Josh Holloway  played a con man,  James "Sawyer" Ford .  Ian Somerhalder  played  Boone Carlyle , chief operating officer of his mother's wedding business.  Maggie Grace  played his stepsister  Shannon Rutherford , a former dance teacher.  Harold Perrineau  portrayed construction worker and aspiring artist  Michael Dawson , while  Malcolm David Kelley  played his young son,  Walt Lloyd .  Terry O'Quinn  played the mysterious  John Locke .  Naveen Andrews  portrayed former  Iraqi Republican Guard   Sayid Jarrah .  Emilie de Ravin  played a young Australian mother-to-be,  Claire Littleton .  Yunjin Kim  played  Sun-Hwa Kwon , the daughter of a powerful Korean businessman and mobster, with  Daniel Dae Kim  as her husband and father's enforcer  Jin-Soo Kwon .  Dominic Monaghan  played English ex-rock star drug addict  Charlie Pace . During the first two seasons, some characters were written out, while new characters with new stories were added. Boone Carlyle was written out near the end of season one, and Kelley became a guest star making occasional appearances throughout season two after Walt is captured by the Others in the season one finale. Shannon's departure eight episodes into season two made way for newcomers  Mr. Eko , a Nigerian fake Catholic priest and former militia leader played by  Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje ;  Ana Lucia Cortez , an airport  TSA  guard and former LAPD police officer played by  Michelle Rodriguez ; and  Libby Smith , a purported clinical psychologist and formerly mentally ill woman portrayed by  Cynthia Watros . Ana Lucia and Libby were written out of the series toward the end of season two after being shot by Michael, who then left the island along with his son. In season three, two actors were promoted from recurring to starring roles:  Henry Ian Cusick  as former Scottish soldier  Desmond Hume ; and  Michael Emerson  as the manipulative leader of the Others,  Ben Linus . In addition, three new actors joined the regular cast:  Elizabeth Mitchell , as fertility doctor and Other  Juliet Burke ; and  Kiele Sanchez  and  Rodrigo Santoro  as background survivor couple  Nikki Fernandez  and  Paulo . Several characters died throughout the season: Eko was written out early on when Akinnuoye-Agbaje did not wish to continue on the show, Nikki and Paulo were buried alive mid-season after poor fan response, and Charlie was written out in the third-season finale. In season four, Harold Perrineau rejoined the main cast to reprise the role of Michael, now suicidal and on a desperate redemptive journey to atone for his previous crimes. Along with Perrineau, additional new actors— Jeremy Davies  as Daniel Faraday, a nervous physicist who takes a scientific interest in the island;  Ken Leung  as  Miles Straume , a sarcastic supposed ghost whisperer; and  Rebecca Mader  as  Charlotte Staples Lewis , a hard-headed and determined anthropologist and successful academic—joined the cast. Michael was written out in the fourth-season finale. Claire, who mysteriously disappears with her dead biological father near the end of the season, did not return as a series regular for the fifth season but returned for the sixth and final season. In season five, no new characters joined the main cast; however, several characters exited the show: Charlotte was written out early in the season in episode five, with Daniel being written out later in the antepenultimate episode. Season six saw several cast changes: Juliet was written out in the season premiere while three previous recurring characters were upgraded to starring status. These included  Nestor Carbonell  as mysterious, age-less Other  Richard Alpert ;  Jeff Fahey  as pilot  Frank Lapidus ; and  Zuleikha Robinson  as Ajira Airways Flight 316 survivor  Ilana Verdansky . Additionally, former cast members Ian Somerhalder, Dominic Monaghan, Rebecca Mader, Jeremy Davies, Elizabeth Mitchell, Maggie Grace, Michelle Rodriguez, Harold Perrineau, and Cynthia Watros made return appearances. Numerous supporting characters have been given expansive and recurring appearances in the progressive storyline.  Danielle Rousseau  ( Mira Furlan )—a French member of an earlier scientific expedition to the island, first encountered as a voice recording in the pilot episode—appears throughout the series. She is searching for her daughter, who later turns up in the form of  Alex Rousseau  ( Tania Raymonde ). Alex has been kidnapped by Ben Linus and brought to the Others where she was raised.  Cindy  ( Kimberley Joseph ), an Oceanic flight attendant who first appeared in the pilot, survived the crash and, subsequently, became one of the Others. In the second season, married couple  Rose Henderson  ( L. Scott Caldwell ) and  Bernard Nadler  ( Sam Anderson ), separated on opposite sides of the island (she with the main characters, he with the tail section survivors), were featured in a flashback episode after being reunited. Corporate magnate  Charles Widmore  ( Alan Dale ) has connections to both Ben and Desmond. Desmond is in love with Widmore's daughter  Penelope "Penny" Widmore  ( Sonya Walger ). The introduction of the Others featured  Tom , aka Mr. Friendly ( M. C. Gainey ), and  Ethan Rom  ( William Mapother ), all of whom have been shown in both flashbacks and the ongoing story. Jack's father  Christian Shephard  ( John Terry ) has appeared in multiple flashbacks of various characters. In the third season,  Naomi Dorrit  ( Marsha Thomason ), the team leader of a group hired by Widmore to find Ben Linus, parachutes onto the island. One member of her team includes the ruthless mercenary  Martin Keamy  ( Kevin Durand ). In the finale episode " The End ", recurring guest stars  Sam Anderson ;  L. Scott Caldwell ;  Francois Chau ;  Fionnula Flanagan ;  Sonya Walger ; and  John Terry  were credited under the "starring" rubric alongside the principal cast. The mysterious black smoke cloud-like entity, known as " the Monster ", appeared in human form during season five and six as a middle-aged man dressed in black robes, who was played by  Titus Welliver , and in season six, it appears in the form of John Locke played by O'Quinn in a  dual role . His rival,  Jacob , was played by  Mark Pellegrino .

Lost was produced by  ABC Studios ,  Bad Robot Productions , and Grass Skirt Productions. Throughout its run, the executive producers of the series were  Damon Lindelof ,  J. J. Abrams ,  Bryan Burk ,  Carlton Cuse ,  Jack Bender ,  Jeff Pinkner ,  Edward Kitsis ,  Adam Horowitz ,  Jean Higgins , and  Elizabeth Sarnoff , with Lindelof and Cuse serving as  showrunner s.

The series was conceived by  Lloyd Braun , head of ABC at the time, while he was on vacation in Hawaii during 2003 and thought of a cross between the movie  Cast Away  and the popular reality show  Survivor . Braun later pitched his ideas at the network's gathering of executives at the  Grand Californian Hotel  in  Anaheim , describing the concept as "parts Cast Away, Survivor, and  Gilligan's Island , with a  Lord of the Flies  element." Many found the idea laughable, but senior vice president Thom Sherman saw potential and decided to order an initial script from  Spelling Television . Spelling producer Ted Gold turned to writer  Jeffrey Lieber , who presented a pitch to ABC in September 2003 titled Nowhere, which Sherman approved. Unhappy with the eventual script by Lieber and a subsequent rewrite, in January 2004, Braun contacted J. J. Abrams, who had developed the TV series  Alias  for ABC, to write a new pilot script. Lieber would later receive a story credit for the Lost pilot and, subsequently, shared the "created by" credit with Abrams and Lindelof, after a request for  arbitration  at the  Writers Guild of America . The one inviolable edict Braun made to Abrams was that the show's title must be Lost, having conceived of the title and being angry at its change to Nowhere by Lieber. Although initially hesitant, Abrams warmed to the idea on the condition that the series would have a  supernatural  angle to it and if he had a writing partner. ABC executive Heather Kadin sent him  Damon Lindelof , who had long intended to meet Abrams as he wished to write for Alias. Together, Abrams and Lindelof created the series' style and characters and also wrote a  series bible  that conceived and detailed the major  mythological  ideas and plot points for an ideal four-to-five-season run for the show. The novel idea of a story arc spanning several years was inspired by  Babylon 5 . Because ABC felt that Alias was too  serialized , Lindelof and Abrams assured the network in the bible that the show would be self-contained: "We promise ... that [each episode] requires NO knowledge of the episode(s) that preceded it ... there is no 'Ultimate Mystery' which requires solving." While such statements contradicted their true plans, the ruse succeeded in persuading ABC to purchase the show. The game  Myst , also set in a tropical island, was noted as an influence by Lindelof, as in its narrative, "No one told you what the rules were. You just had to walk around and explore these environments and gradually a story was told."Abrams created the sound opening of the show and its title card being inspired by  The Twilight Zone . He withdrew from production of Lost partway through the first season to direct  Mission: Impossible III , leaving Lindelof and new executive producer Carlton Cuse to develop much of the overall  mythology of the series  themselves. However, Abrams briefly returned to help co-write the third-season premiere along with Lindelof. The development of the show was constrained by tight deadlines, as it had been commissioned late in the 2004 season's development cycle. Despite the short schedule, the creative team remained flexible enough to modify or create characters to fit actors they wished to cast.Losts two-part pilot episode was the most expensive in the network's history, reportedly costing between US$10 and $14 million, compared to the average cost of an hour-long pilot in 2005 of $4 million. The world premiere of the pilot episode was on July 24, 2004, at  Comic-Con International  in San Diego. ABC's parent company  Disney  fired Braun before Losts broadcast debut, partly because of low ratings at the network and also because he had  greenlight ed such an expensive and risky project. The series debuted on September 22, 2004, becoming one of the biggest critical and commercial successes of the  2004 television season . Along with fellow new series  Desperate Housewives  and  Grey's Anatomy , Lost helped to reverse the flagging fortunes of ABC, and its great success likely caused the network to ignore that the show almost immediately broke Lindelof and Abrams' promises to it regarding Losts plots.

Many of the first season roles were a result of the executive producers' liking of various actors. The main character Jack was originally going to die in the pilot, and the role was planned for  Michael Keaton . However, ABC executives were adamant that Jack live. Before it was decided that Jack would live, Kate was to emerge as the leader of the survivors; she was originally conceived as a middle-aged businesswoman whose husband had apparently died in the crash, a role later fulfilled by the recurring character Rose. Dominic Monaghan auditioned for the role of Sawyer, who at the time was supposed to be a slick suit-wearing city con man. The producers enjoyed Monaghan's performance and changed the character of Charlie, originally an over-the-hill former rock star, to fit him. Jorge Garcia also auditioned for Sawyer, and the part of Hurley was written for him. When Josh Holloway auditioned for Sawyer, the producers liked the edge he brought to the character (he reportedly kicked a chair when he forgot his lines and got angry in the audition) and his  southern accent , so they changed Sawyer to fit Holloway's acting. Yunjin Kim auditioned for Kate, but the producers wrote the character of Sun for her and the character of Jin, portrayed by Daniel Dae Kim, to be her husband. Sayid, played by Naveen Andrews, was also not in the original script. Locke and Michael were written with their actors in mind. Emilie de Ravin, who played Claire, was originally cast in what was supposed to be a recurring role. In the second season, Michael Emerson was contracted to play Ben ("Henry Gale") for three episodes. His role was extended to eight episodes because of his acting skills and eventually, for the whole of season three and later seasons.

Lost was filmed on  Panavision   35 mm  cameras almost entirely on the Hawaiian island of  Oahu  due to the wide range of diverse filming locations available in close range. The original island scenes for the pilot were filmed at  Mokulē'ia  Beach, near the northwest tip of the island. Later beach scenes take place in secluded spots of the famous  North Shore . Cave scenes in the first season were filmed on a  sound stage  built at a  Xerox  parts warehouse, which had been empty since an  employee mass shooting  took place there in 1999.  In 2006, the sound-stage and production offices moved to the Hawaii Film Office-operated Hawaii Film Studio, where the sets depicting Season 2's "Swan Station" and Season 3's "Hydra Station" interiors were built. Various urban areas in and around  Honolulu  are used as stand-ins for locations around the world, including California, New York,  Iowa , Miami, South Korea,  Iraq , Nigeria, United Kingdom, Paris,  Thailand , Berlin, Maldives, and Australia. For example, scenes set in a  Sydney Airport  were filmed at the  Hawaii Convention Center , while a World War II-era bunker was used as both an  Iraqi Republican Guard  installation and a  Dharma Initiative  research station. Scenes set in Germany during the winter were filmed at the  Bernice P. Bishop Museum , with crushed ice scattered everywhere to create snow and Russian storeshop and automobile signs on the street. Several scenes in the Season 3 finale, " Through the Looking Glass ", were shot in Los Angeles, including a hospital set borrowed from Grey's Anatomy. Two scenes during season four were filmed in London because  Alan Dale , who portrays Widmore, was at the time performing in the musical  Spamalot  and was unable to travel to Hawaii. Extensive archives of filming locations are tracked at a repository at the Lost Virtual Tour.

During its six years of broadcasting, Lost developed an extensive collection of promotional tools ranging from the traditional promotions of the TV show made by the channel, to the creation of  alternate reality games , such as the  Lost Experience . Lost showed innovation in the use of new advertising strategies in the sector and the transformation of the conventional devices used previously.

Lost features an  orchestral score  performed by the  Hollywood Studio Symphony Orchestra  and composed by  Michael Giacchino , incorporating many recurring themes for subjects, such as events, locations, and characters. Giacchino achieved some of the sounds for the score using unusual instruments, such as striking suspended pieces of the plane's  fuselage . On March 21, 2006, the record label  Varèse Sarabande  released the original television soundtrack for Losts first season. The soundtrack included select full-length versions of the most popular themes of the season and the main title, which was composed by series creator J. J. Abrams. Varèse Sarabande released a soundtrack featuring music from season 2 of Lost on October 3, 2006. The soundtrack for season 3 was released on May 6, 2008; the soundtrack for season 4 was released on May 11, 2009; the soundtrack for season 5 was released on May 11, 2010; and the soundtrack for the final season was released on September 14, 2010. A final soundtrack, featuring music from series finale, was released on October 11, 2010. The series uses pop culture songs sparingly and used a mainly orchestral score (consisting usually of divided Strings, Percussion, Harp, and 3 Trombones.) When it features pop songs, they often originate from a  diegetic  source. Examples include the various songs played on Hurley's portable CD player throughout the first season (until its batteries died in the episode " [... In Translation](... In Translation) ", which featured Damien Rice's "Delicate) or the use of the record player in the second season, which included  Cass Elliot 's " Make Your Own Kind of Music " and  Petula Clark 's " Downtown " in the second and third season premieres respectively. Two episodes show Charlie on a street corner playing guitar and singing the  Oasis  song " Wonderwall ." In the third season's finale, Jack drives down the street listening to  Nirvana 's "Scentless Apprentice", right before he arrives to the Hoffs/Drawlar Funeral Parlor, and in the parallel scene in the fourth season's finale, he arrives listening to " Gouge Away " by  Pixies . The third season also used  Three Dog Night 's " Shambala " on two occasions in the van. The only two pop songs that have ever been used without an on-screen source (i.e., non- diegetic ) are  Ann-Margret 's "Slowly", in the episode " I Do " and "I Shall Not Walk Alone", written by  Ben Harper  and covered by  The Blind Boys of Alabama  in the episode " Confidence Man ." Alternate music is used in several international broadcasts. For instance, in the Japanese broadcast of Lost, the  theme song  used varies by season: season one uses "Here I Am" by  Chemistry , season two uses " Losin' " by  Yuna Ito , and season three uses "Lonely Girl" by  Crystal Kay .

Lost originally aired on the  American Broadcasting Company  (ABC) from September 22, 2004, to May 23, 2010. The pilot episode had 18.6 million viewers, easily winning its 9:00 pm timeslot, and giving ABC its strongest  ratings  since 2000 when  [Who Wants to Be a Millionaire](Who Wants to Be a Millionaire (U. S. game show))  was initially aired—beaten only the following month by the premiere of  Desperate Housewives . According to  Variety , "ABC sure could use a breakout drama success, as it hasn't had a real hit since  The Practice . Lost represents the network's best start for a drama with 18- to 49-year-olds since  Once and Again  in 1999, and in total viewers since  Murder One  in 1995."For its first season, Lost averaged 16 million viewers, ranking 14th in viewership among prime-time shows and 15th among the eighteen to forty-nine-year-old  demographic . Its second season fared equally well: again, Lost ranked 14th in viewership, with an average of 15.5 million viewers. However, it improved its rating with 18- to 49-year-olds, ranking eighth. The second-season premiere was even more viewed than the first, pulling in over 23 million viewers and setting a series record. The third-season premiere brought in 18.8 million viewers. The seventh episode of the season, back from a three-month hiatus, saw a drop to 14.5 million. Over the course of the spring season, ratings would plunge to as low as 11 million viewers before recovering to near 14 million for the season finale. The ratings drop was partially explained when  Nielsen  released  DVR  ratings, showing Lost as the most recorded series on television. However, despite overall ratings losses, Lost still won its hour in the crucial 18–49 demographic and put out the highest 18–49 numbers in the 10:00 p.m. time slot ahead of any show on any network that season. The fourth-season premiere saw an increase from the previous episode to 16.1 million viewers, though by the eighth episode, viewers had decreased to a series low of 11.461 million. A survey of 20 countries by Informa Telecoms and Media in 2006 concluded that Lost was the second most popular TV show in those countries, after  CSI: Miami . The sixth-season premiere was the first to climb in the ratings year-over-year since the second season, drawing 12.1 million viewers.

Capping its successful first season, Lost won the  Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series  and J. J. Abrams was awarded an Emmy in September 2005 for his work as the director of "Pilot." Terry O'Quinn and Naveen Andrews were nominated in the Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series category. Lost swept the guild awards in 2005, winning the  Writers Guild of America Awards 2005  for Outstanding Achievement in Writing for a Dramatic Television Series, the 2005 Producers Guild Award for Best Production, the 2005 Director's Guild Award for Best Direction of a Dramatic Television Program, and the  Screen Actors Guild Awards 2005  for Best Ensemble Cast. It was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Television Drama Series three times (2005–2007), and it won the award in 2006. In 2006, Matthew Fox and Naveen Andrews received Golden Globe nominations for  Best Lead Actor in a Drama Series  and  Best Supporting Actor  respectively, and in 2007, Evangeline Lilly received a nomination for  Best Actress in a Television Drama Series . Lost was nominated for the 2005  British Academy of Film and Television Award  for Best International. In 2006, Jorge Garcia and Michelle Rodriguez took home  ALMA Awards  for Best Supporting Actor and Actress, respectively, in a Television Series. It won the  Saturn Award  for Best Television Series in both 2005 and 2006. In 2005, Terry O'Quinn won a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor in a television series, and in 2006, Matthew Fox won for Best Lead Actor. Lost won consecutive Television Critics Association Awards for Outstanding Achievement in Drama, for both its first and second seasons. Consecutively as well, it won in 2005 and 2006 the  Visual Effects Society Award  for Outstanding Supporting Visual Effects in a Broadcast Program.  Malcolm David Kelley won a  Young Artist Award  for his performance as Walt in 2006. In 2005, Lost was voted  Entertainment Weekly s Entertainer of the Year. The show won a 2005 Prism Award for Charlie's drug storyline in the episodes "Pilot", "House of the Rising Sun", and "The Moth." In 2007, Lost was listed as one of  Time  magazine's "100 Best TV Shows of All-TIME." The series was nominated for but did not win a Writers Guild Award and Producers Guild Award again in 2007. In June 2007, Lost beat out over 20 nominated television shows from countries all over the globe to win the Best Drama award at the  Monte Carlo Television Festival . In September 2007, both Michael Emerson and Terry O'Quinn were nominated for an  Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series , the award going to O'Quinn. Lost was again nominated for Outstanding Drama Series at the  60th Primetime Emmy Awards  in 2008. The show also garnered seven other Emmy nominations, including Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for Michael Emerson. It won a  Peabody Award  in 2008. In 2009, Lost was again nominated for Outstanding Drama Series, as well Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for Michael Emerson at the  61st Primetime Emmy Awards , of which the latter won. In 2010, the sixth and final season was nominated for twelve Emmy Awards at the  62nd Primetime Emmy Awards , including Outstanding Drama Series; Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series, for Carlton Cuse and Damon Lindelof for the show's series finale, "The End"; Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series, for Matthew Fox; Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, for Michael Emerson and Terry O'Quinn; and Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series, for Elizabeth Mitchell. It won only one Emmy (Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing) out of its twelve nominations for a series total of 11 wins and 55 nominations in its six-year run. In 2010,  Kristin dos Santos  of  E! Online  ranked Lost the best TV series of the past 20 years. In 2013, the  Writers Guild of America  ranked Lost No. 27 in its list of the 101 Best Written TV Series of All Time. In 2014, the series was nominated for the  TCA Heritage Award . In 2016,  Rolling Stone  ranked it the fourteenth best science fiction television show ever.

Lost has been described by numerous critics as being among the greatest television series of all time. Bill Carter, television reporter of  The New York Times , defined Lost as "the show with perhaps the most compelling continuing story line in television history."  Entertainment Weekly  put the show on its end-of-the-decade, "best-of" list, saying, "Name another network drama that can so wondrously turn a ? into a !" In 2012, Entertainment Weekly also listed the show at #10 in the "25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years", with a hot-and-cold description: "Lost was initially celebrated as a moving character-driven drama with a broad humanistic worldview that also presented itself as dramatic cryptography that demanded to be solved. The appeal narrowed as seasons progressed and the mythology became more complex, culminating in a still-debated finale that was deeply meaningful to some and dissatisfying poppycock to others." In 2013, it was ranked at #36 on TV Guides list of the "60 Best Series of All Time."

The first season received critical acclaim.  USA Today  said it was a "totally original, fabulously enjoyable lost-at-sea series, Lost had taken "an outlandish Saturday-serial setup and imbued it with real characters and honest emotions, without sacrificing any of the old-fashioned fun." The  Los Angeles Times  praised the production values and said it "knows the buttons it wants to push (fear of flying, fear of abandonment, fear of the unknown) and pushes them, repeatedly, like a kid playing a video game." IGN noted that the first season "succeeded first and foremost in character development." Lost season one was ranked number one in the "Best of 2005 TV Coverage: Critic Top Ten Lists" by Matthew Gilbert of  The Boston Globe , Tom Gliatto of  People Weekly , Charlie McCollum of the  San Jose Mercury News , and Robert Bianco of USA Today.

The second season received favorable reviews, but it was noted that the season "stumbled with some storylines going nowhere and some characters underutilized."  IGN  also noted the addition of  Desmond Hume  as a standout new character. The  San Francisco Chronicle  called Season 2 an "extended, mostly unsatisfying foray into deeper mythology with very little payoff." After winning "Best Drama Series" for season one, Lost was snubbed by the Emmy Awards in Season 2. Nearing the end of the second season, USA Today listed the most popular fan theories during Season 2—the island as a psychological experiment, that the hatch had electromagnetic properties,  string theory  of time, and that everyone on the island had developed a "collective consciousness" that allowed them to appear in each other's past. One fan interview by USA Today said that "Real suspense comes from answers, not questions. Suspense comes not from wondering what's going on but from wondering what happens next. If you withhold answers, it becomes impossible to satisfy."

The first block of episodes of the third season was criticized for raising too many mysteries and not providing enough answers.  Complaints were also made about the limited screen-time for many of the main characters in the first block.  Locke, played by Terry O'Quinn, who had tied for the highest second-season episode count, appeared in only 13 of 22 episodes in the third season—only two more than guest star M. C. Gainey, who played Tom. Reaction to two new characters, Nikki and Paulo, was generally negative, and Lindelof even acknowledged that the couple was "universally despised" by fans. The decision to split the season and the American timeslot switch after the hiatus were also criticized. Cuse acknowledged that, "No one was happy with the six-episode run." The second block of episodes was critically acclaimed, however, with the crew dealing with problems from the first block. More answers were written into the show, and Nikki and Paulo were  killed off .  It was also announced that the series would end three seasons after the third season, which Cuse hoped would tell the audience that the writers knew where the story was going.

The fourth season opened to critical acclaim not seen since the first season. Metacritic gave season four a weighted average of 87 based on the impressions of a select twelve critical reviews, earning the second highest Metascore in the  2007–2008 television season  after the  fifth and final season  of  HBO 's  The Wire . For the first time since season one, Lost received an Emmy nomination for 'Outstanding Drama Series'. Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle said that the Season 4 episodes were "roller coasters of fast action and revelation" and that series was "back on track." In a survey conducted by TVWeek of professional critics, Lost was voted the best show on television in the first half of 2008 "by a wide margin", apparently "crack[ing] the top five on nearly every critic's submission" and receiving "nothing but praise." The New York Times said the show reveled in critiques of capitalism, using the fictional Mittelos Bioscience and the "malevolent British industrialist" character of Charles Widmore as examples. The critic also said that the show "in the dark business of exploring just how futile the modern search for peace, knowledge, recovery or profit really is." The critic did go on to say that series was not as "philosophically refined" as  The Sopranos  or  The Wire  but that it "has maximized the potential of narrative uncertainty and made it a beguiling constant."

The fifth season once again received mostly positive critical reception. Season 5 was given a weighted average of 78 out of 100 by  Metacritic .  Variety  said that "The ABC series remains one of primetime's most uncompromising efforts, and this year's latest wrinkle on flashbacks, flash-forwards and island-disappearing flashes of light does nothing to alter that perception."  Alan Sepinwall  of  The Newark Star Ledger  said that season 5 may finally be "a day of reckoning between those viewers who embrace the show's science-fiction trappings, and those who prefer not to think about them." Sepinwall also related that "I loved every minute. But I'm also a geek who read  Ray Bradbury  and  Isaac Asimov  growing up." Heather Havrilesky of  Salon.com  criticized the use of time travel saying that "when a narrator brings magic or time travel or an act of God into the picture, then uses it without restraint, the story loses its anchor to real life." The critic also asked "Why does it matter what Locke and Richard Alpert and Daniel Faraday or anyone else does, when they all seem as clueless and unfettered from reality as we are as viewers? How can these characters have any concrete agenda or strategic approach or philosophical perspective on anything when the rug is pulled out from under them by another Act of God every few seconds?"  The New York Times  also commented that "what has been most dispiriting about the current season is the show's willingness to abandon many of the larger and more compelling themes that grounded the elaborate plot: the struggles between faith and reason; the indictments of extreme capitalism, the futility of recovery. All that remains is the reductively limned battle between fate and free will largely playing out, now, in Jack Shephard's belief that returning to the island is his Destiny."  [The A. V. Club](The A. V. Club)  said of the fifth-season finale, "Me? I found the ending frustrating, but in a good way. This finale was entertaining as all get-out to me, and despite the occasional groaner moment, I think this may be Lost's most purposeful, surprising finale."

Season six opened to much hype and curiosity. The A. V. Club asked, "I'm guessing that one of the biggest fears of Lost fans as we ride out this sixth and final season—bumps and all—is that we're going to come to the end and find a big nothing in return for all we've invested in these characters. We don't just need answers, we need justifications. Why has whatever happened, happened? Who has called this particular meeting to order, and does it really matter who showed up?" The episodes " Dr. Linus ", " Ab Aeterno ", " Happily Ever After ", and " The Candidate " opened to highly positive critical reception while the third-to-last episode " Across the Sea " was the episode with the most negative reception. The time spent at the Others' temple was criticized.  E! Online  described the show as "lightning in a bottle" and picked it as "Top TV Drama of 2010."

The series finale opened to highly polarized critical and fan reception. According to the web site  Metacritic , "The End" received "generally favorable reviews" with a Metascore—a weighted average based on the impressions of 31 critical reviews—of 74 out of 100.  IGN  reviewer Chris Carbot gave the finale a 10/10, tying it with the initial review of " Pilot, Part 1 ", " Through the Looking Glass ", " The Constant ", and " There's No Place Like Home, Parts 2 & 3 " as the best-reviewed episode of Lost. He described it as "one of the most enthralling, entertaining and satisfying conclusions I could have hoped for." Carbot also noted that the discussions about the episode may never end, saying "Lost may be gone, but it will hardly be forgotten." Eric Deggans of the  St. Petersburg Times  also gave the finale a perfect score, stating "Sunday's show was an emotional, funny, expertly measured reminder of what Lost has really centered on since its first moments on the prime time TV landscape: faith, hope, romance and the power of redemption through belief in the best of what moves mankind." Robert Bianco of  USA Today  rated the episode perfect as well, deeming the finale "can stand with the best any series has produced." Hal Boedeker of  Orlando Sentinel  cited the finale being "a stunner."British newspapers  The Guardian  and  The Daily Telegraph  both reported that "The End" had received negative reviews and disappointed its viewers. Alan Sepinwall of  Star-Ledger  was less enthusiastic of the finale, stating "I'm still wrestling with my feelings about 'The End'... I thought most of it worked like gangbusters. ... But as someone who did spend at least part of the last six years dwelling on the questions that were unanswered—be they little things like the outrigger shootout or why The Others left Dharma in charge of the Swan station after the purge, or bigger ones like Walt—I can't say I found 'The End' wholly satisfying, either as closure for this season or the series. ... There are narrative dead ends in every season of 'Lost,' but it felt like season six had more than usual." Mike Hale of  The New York Times  gave "The End" a mixed review, as the episode showed that the series was "shaky on the big picture—on organizing the welter of mythic-religious-philosophical material it insisted on incorporating into its plot—but highly skilled at the small one, the moment to moment business of telling an exciting story. Rendered insignificant ... were the particulars of what they had done on the island." David Zurawik of the  Baltimore Sun  gave the episode a highly negative review, writing "If this is supposed to be such a smart and wise show, unlike anything else on network TV (blah, blah, blah), why such a wimpy, phony, quasi-religious, white-light, huggy-bear ending. ... Once Jack stepped into the church it looked like he was walking into a Hollywood wrap party without food or music—just a bunch of actors grinning idiotically for 10 minutes and hugging one another."

As a mainstream  cult television  show, Lost has generated a dedicated and thriving international  fan  community. Lost fans, sometimes dubbed Lostaways or Losties, have gathered at  Comic-Con International  and conventions organized by ABC but have also been active in developing a large number of fan websites, including  Lostpedia  and forums dedicated to the program and its related incarnations. Because of the show's elaborate mythology, its fansites have focused on speculation and theorizing about the island's mysteries, as well as on more typical fan activities, such as producing  fan fiction  and videos, compiling episode transcripts,  shipping  characters, and collecting memorabilia. Anticipating fan interest and trying to keep its audience engrossed, ABC embarked on various cross-media endeavors, often using new media. Fans of Lost have been able to explore ABC-produced tie-in websites, tie-in novels, an official forum sponsored by the creative team behind Lost ("The Fuselage"), " mobisode s", podcasts by the producers, an official magazine, and an  alternate reality game  (ARG) " The Lost Experience ." An official fanclub was launched in the summer of 2005 through Creation Entertainment. Due to the show's popularity, references to it and elements from its story have appeared in  parody  and popular culture usage. These include appearances on television, such as on the series  Will & Grace ,  Curb Your Enthusiasm ,  30 Rock ,  Scrubs ,  Modern Family ,  Orange Is the New Black ,  Community ,  [The Office](The Office (U. S. TV series)) ,  Family Guy ,  American Dad! ,  The Simpsons , and  The Venture Bros. . Lost is also featured as an  Easter egg  in several video games, including  Dead Island ,  Half-Life 2: Episode Two ,  Fallout 3 ,  Uncharted 2: Among Thieves ,  World of Warcraft ,  Just Cause 2 ,  Batman: Arkham City , and  Singularity . Similarly, several songs have been published whose themes and titles were derived from the series, such as  Moneen  ("Don't Ever Tell Locke What He Can't Do"),  Veil of Maya  ("Namaste"),  Cosmo Jarvis  ("Lost"),  Senses Fail  ("Lost and Found" and "All the Best Cowboys Have Daddy Issues"),  Gatsbys American Dream  ("You All Everybody" and "Station 5: The Pearl"), and  Punchline  ("Roller Coaster Smoke").  Weezer  named their eighth studio album  Hurley  after the character, with a photo of actor  Jorge Garcia  on the cover. After the episode " Numbers " aired on March 2, 2005, numerous people used the eponymous figures ( 4, 8, 15, 16, 23, and 42 ) as lottery entries. According to the  Pittsburgh Tribune-Review , within three days, the numbers were tried over 500 times by local players. By October 2005, thousands had tried them for the multi-state  Powerball  lottery. A study of the  Quebec Lottery  showed that the sequence was the third most popular choice of numbers for lottery players, behind only the  arithmetic sequence s 1–2–3–4–5–6 and 7–14–21–28–35–42. The issue came to attention after a Mega Millions drawing for a near-record US $380,000,000 jackpot on January 4, 2011, drew a series of numbers in which the three lowest numbers (4–8–15) and the mega ball (42) matched four of the six numbers. The No. 42 is also the "Mega Number" in Hurley's "Mega Lotto" ticket. The players who played the combination won $150 each (or $118 in California).

Lost has been cited as a key influence on several of its contemporaries. The  ABC  series  FlashForward  was heavily compared to Lost, because of its similar use of  nonlinear narrative  and mysteries. J. J. Abrams cited Lost as one of the influences for his science fiction series  Fringe . The  NBC  series  Heroes  drew comparisons to Lost during its run, because of some similarities such as its  ensemble cast .  Damon Lindelof  was involved in the early stages of the creative process of Heroes, as he was friends with Heroes creator  Tim Kring . Ever since its premiere,  The 100  has been compared to Lost because of its similar setting and the importance of survival in its story. The  [TBS](TBS (U. S. TV channel))  comedy  [Wrecked](Wrecked (U. S. TV series))  has been defined as a  parody  of Lost, because of its very similar premise and multiple references to the drama. Adam Horowitz  and  Edward Kitsis , former writers of Lost created the fantasy series  Once Upon a Time , which has also been compared to Lost. Even though their series started after Lost ended, they conceived it in 2004. Damon Lindelof was involved in the development of their series. Despite the comparisons and similarities to Lost, the writers intend the shows to be very different from each other. To them, Lost concerned itself with redemption, while Once Upon a Time is about "hope". As a nod to the ties between the production teams of Once Upon a Time and Lost, the former show contains  allusions to Lost , and is expected to continue alluding to Lost throughout its run. For example, many items found in the Lost universe, such as  Apollo candy bars ,  Oceanic Airlines ,  Ajira Airways , the TV series Exposé and MacCutcheon Whisky can be seen in Once Upon a Time.

In addition to traditional terrestrial and  satellite broadcasting , Lost is available from various online services, including  Amazon Video  and  Netflix . It was one of the first series issued through  Apple's   iTunes Store  beginning in October 2005. On August 29, 2007, Lost became one of the first TV programs available for download in the UK iTunes Store. In April 2006,  Disney  announced that Lost would be available for free online in streaming format, with advertising, on ABC's website, as part of a two-month experiment of future distribution strategies. The trial, which ran from May to June 2006, caused a stir among network affiliates who were afraid of being cut out of advertising revenue. The streaming of Lost episodes direct from ABC's website was only available to viewers in the United States due to international licensing agreements. In 2009, Lost was named the most-watched show on the Internet based on viewers of episodes on ABC's website. The  Nielsen Company  reported that 1.425 million unique viewers have watched at least one episode on ABC's website.

The first season of Lost was released under the title  Lost: The Complete First Season  as a  widescreen  seven-disc  Region 1  DVD  box set  on September 6, 2005, two weeks before the premiere of the second season. It was distributed by Buena Vista Home Entertainment. In addition to all the episodes that had been aired, it included several DVD extras, such as episode commentaries, behind-the-scenes footage and making-of features as well as  deleted scenes , deleted flashback scenarios, and a  blooper  reel. The same set was released on November 30, 2005, in  Region 4 , The season was first released split into two parts: the first twelve episodes of season 1 were available as a wide screen four-disc Region 2 DVD box set on October 31, 2005, while the remaining thirteen episodes of season 1 were released on January 16, 2006. The DVD features available on the Region 1 release were likewise split over the two box sets. The first two seasons were released separately on  Blu-ray Disc  on June 16, 2009. The second season was released under the title  Lost: The Complete Second Season – The Extended Experience  as a wide screen seven-disc Region 1 DVD box set on September 5, 2006. The sets include several DVD extras, including behind the scenes footage, deleted scenes, and a "Lost Connections" chart, which shows how all of the characters on the island are inter-connected. Again, the season was initially delivered in two sets for Region 2: the first twelve episodes were released as a widescreen four-disc DVD box set on July 17, 2006, while the remaining episodes of season 2 were released as a four-disc DVD box set on October 2, 2006. The set was released in Region 4 on October 4, 2006. The third season was released under the title  Lost: The Complete Third Season – The Unexplored Experience  on DVD and Blu-ray in Region 1 on December 11, 2007. As with seasons 1 and 2, the third season release includes audio commentaries with the cast and crew, bonus featurettes, deleted scenes, and bloopers. The third season was released in Region 2 solely on DVD on October 22, 2007, though this time, only as a complete set, unlike previous seasons. The fourth season was released as  Lost: The Complete Fourth Season – The Expanded Experience  in Region 1 on December 9, 2008, on both DVD and Blu-ray Disc. It was released on DVD in Region 2 on October 20, 2008. The set includes audio commentaries, deleted scenes, bloopers, and bonus featurettes. The first three seasons of Lost have sold successfully on DVD. The Season 1 boxset entered the DVD sales chart at number two in September 2005, and the Season 2 boxset entered the DVD sales chart at the number one position in its first week of release in September 2006, believed to be the second TV-DVD ever to enter the chart at the top spot. The Season 3 boxset sold over 1,000,000 copies in three weeks. Both the Season 6 boxset and the complete series collection contained a 12 minute epilogue-like bonus feature called " The New Man in Charge ." The Season 6 DVD set entered the DVD sales chart at the number one position in its first week of release in September 2010 boasting strong sales in the DVD and Blu-ray format for the regular season set as well as for the series box set.

The characters and setting of Lost have appeared in several official tie-ins outside of the television broadcast, including in print, on the Internet, and in short videos for mobile phones. Three  novelization s have been released by  Hyperion Books , a publisher owned by  Disney , ABC's parent company. They are Endangered Species (ISBN 0-7868-9090-8) and Secret Identity (ISBN 0-7868-9091-6) both by Cathy Hapka and Signs of Life (ISBN 0-7868-9092-4) by Frank Thompson. Additionally, Hyperion published a  metafictional  book titled Bad Twin (ISBN 1-4013-0276-9), written by Laurence Shames, and credited to fictitious author " Gary Troup ", who ABC's marketing department claimed was a passenger on Oceanic Flight 815. Several unofficial books relating to the show have also been published. Finding Lost: The Unofficial Guide (ISBN 1-55022-743-2) by Nikki Stafford and published by  ECW Press  is a book detailing the show for fans and those new to the show. What Can Be Found in Lost? (ISBN 0-7369-2121-4) by John Ankerberg and Dillon Burrough, published by Harvest House is the first book dedicated to an investigation of the spiritual themes of the series from a Christian perspective. Living Lost: Why We're All Stuck on the Island (ISBN 1-891053-02-7) by J. Wood, published by the Garett County Press, is the first work of cultural criticism based on the series. The book explores the show's strange engagement with the contemporary experiences of war, (mis)information, and terrorism and argues that the audience functions as a character in the narrative. The author also writes a blog column during the second part of the third season for  Powell's Books . Each post discusses the previous episode's literary, historical, philosophical, and narrative connections. The show's networks and producers have made extensive use of the Internet in expanding the background of the story. For example, during the first season, a fictional diary by an unseen survivor called "Janelle Granger" was presented on the ABC web site for the series. Likewise, a tie-in website about the fictional  Oceanic Airlines  appeared during the first season, which included several  Easter eggs  and clues about the show. Another tie-in website was launched after the airing of " Orientation " about the Hanso Foundation. In the UK, the interactive back-stories of several characters were included in "Lost Untold", a section of  Channel 4 's Lost website. Similarly, beginning in November 2005, ABC produced an official  podcast , hosted by series writers and executive producers Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse. The podcast typically features a discussion about the weekly episode, interviews with cast members, and questions from viewers.  Sky1  also hosted a podcast presented by  Iain Lee  on their website, which analyzed each episode after it aired in the United Kingdom. The foray into the online realm culminated in the  Lost Experience , an Internet-based alternate reality game produced by Channel 7 (Australia), ABC (America), and Channel Four (UK), which began in early May 2006. The game presents a five-phase parallel storyline, primarily involving the Hanso Foundation. Short mini-episodes (" mobisode s") called the Lost Video Diaries were originally scheduled for viewing by  Verizon Wireless  subscribers via its V-Cast system but were delayed by contract disputes. The mobisodes were renamed  Lost: Missing Pieces  and aired from November 7, 2007, to January 28, 2008.

In addition to tie-in novels, several other products based on the series, such as toys and games, have been licensed for release. A video game,  Lost: Via Domus , was released to average reviews, developed by  Ubisoft , for  game consoles  and home computers, while  Gameloft  developed a Lost game for mobile phones and  iPod s.  Cardinal Games released a Lost board game on August 7, 2006. TDC Games created a series of four 1000-piece jigsaw puzzles ("The Hatch", "The Numbers", "The Others", and "Before the Crash"), which, when put together, reveal embedded clues to the overall mythology of Lost. Inkworks has published three sets of Lost  trading card s, Season One, Season Two, and Revelations. In May 2006,  McFarlane Toys  announced recurring lines of character  action figures  and released the first series in November 2006, with the second series being released July 2007. Furthermore, ABC sold a myriad of Lost merchandise in their online store, including clothing, jewelry, and other collectibles. In October 2010,  DK Publishing  released a 400-page reference titled The Lost Encyclopedia, written by Tara Bennett and Paul Terry. The book compiled information from the TV show producers "writers bible", listing nearly every character, chronological event, location, and plot detail of the series, filling in the gaps for die-hard fans.