Syria
'Syria' (; سوريا Sūriyā), officially known as the 'Syrian Arab Republic' (الجمهورية العربية السورية al-Jumhūrīyah al-ʻArabīyah as-Sūrīyah), is a country in  Western Asia , bordering  Lebanon  and the  Mediterranean Sea  to the west,  Turkey  to the north,  Iraq  to the east,  Jordan  to the south, and  Israel  to the southwest. Syria's capital and largest city is  Damascus . A country of fertile plains, high mountains, and deserts, Syria is home to  diverse ethnic and religious groups , including  Syrian Arabs ,  Greeks ,  Armenians ,  Assyrians ,  Kurds ,  Circassians ,   Mandeans  and  Turks . Religious groups include  Sunnis ,  Christians ,  Alawites ,  Druze ,  Mandeans ,  Shiites ,  Salafi s, and  Yazidis . Sunni Arabs make up the largest population group in Syria. In English, the name "Syria" was formerly synonymous with the  Levant  (known in Arabic as al-Sham), while the modern state encompasses the sites of several ancient kingdoms and empires, including the  Ebla n civilization of the 3rd millennium  BC . Its capital  Damascus  and largest city  Aleppo  are among the  [oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world](List of cities by time of continuous habitation) . In the  Islam ic era,  Damascus  was the seat of the  Umayyad Caliphate  and a provincial capital of the  Mamluk Sultanate  in Egypt. The modern Syrian state was established after the end of centuries of  Ottoman  control in  World War I  as a  French mandate , and represented the largest Arab state to emerge from the formerly  Ottoman -ruled Arab Levant. It gained independence as a  parliamentary republic  on 24 October 1945 when Syria became a founding member of the United Nations, an act which legally ended the former French Mandate – although French troops did not leave the country until April 1946. The post-independence period was tumultuous, and a large number of  military coup s and coup attempts shook the country in the period 1949–71. In 1958, Syria entered a brief union with Egypt called the  United Arab Republic , which was terminated by the  1961 Syrian coup d'état . The Arab Republic of Syria came into being in late 1961 after  December 1 constitutional referendum , and was increasingly unstable until the  Ba'athist coup d'état , since which the Ba'ath Party has maintained its power. Syria was under Emergency Law from 1963 to 2011, effectively suspending most constitutional protections for citizens.  Bashar al-Assad  has been president since 2000 and was preceded by his father  Hafez al-Assad , who was in office from 1970 to 2000. Syria is a member of one international organization other than the United Nations, the  Non-Aligned Movement ; it has become suspended from the  Arab League  on November 2011 and the  Organisation of Islamic Cooperation , and self-suspended from the  Union for the Mediterranean . Since March 2011, Syria has been embroiled in an  uprising  against Assad and the  Ba'athist  government as part of the  Arab Spring , a crackdown that contributed to the  Syrian Civil War  and to Syria's becoming one of the most violent countries in the world. A number of pseudo-state entities have since emerged on Syrian territories, including the  Syrian Opposition , the  Federation of Northern Syria  and  Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant .

The name Syria is derived from the 8th century BC  Luwian  term "Sura/i", and the derivative  ancient Greek  name: Σύριοι, Sýrioi, or Σύροι, Sýroi, both of which originally derived from Aššūrāyu ( Assyria ) in northern  Mesopotamia . However, from the  Seleucid Empire  (323–150 BC), this term was also applied to  The Levant , and from this point the Greeks applied the term without distinction between the  Assyrians  of Mesopotamia and  Arameans  of the Levant. Mainstream modern academic opinion strongly favours the argument that the Greek word is related to the cognate Ἀσσυρία,  Assyria , ultimately derived from the  Akkadian   Aššur . In the past, others believed that it was derived from Siryon, the name that the  Sidon ians gave to  Mount Hermon . However, the discovery of the  Çineköy inscription  in 2000 seems to support the theory that the term Syria derives from  Assyria , whose ancient homeland was located in modern northern  Iraq . The area designated by the word has changed over time. Classically, Syria lies at the eastern end of the Mediterranean, between  Arabia  to the south and  Asia Minor  to the north, stretching inland to include parts of Iraq, and having an uncertain border to the northeast that  Pliny the Elder  describes as including, from west to east,  Commagene ,  Sophene , and  Adiabene . By Pliny's time, however, this larger Syria had been divided into a number of provinces under the  Roman Empire  (but politically independent from each other):  Judaea , later renamed  Palaestina  in AD 135 (the region corresponding to  modern-day Israel , the Palestinian Territories, and Jordan) in the extreme southwest;  Phoenice  (established in 194 AD) corresponding to modern Lebanon, Damascus and Homs regions;  Coele-Syria  (or "Hollow Syria") south of the  Eleutheris river , and Iraq.

Since approximately 10,000 BC, Syria was one of centers of  Neolithic  culture (known as  Pre-Pottery Neolithic A ) where agriculture and cattle breeding appeared for the first time in the world. The following Neolithic period ( PPNB ) is represented by rectangular houses of  Mureybet  culture. At the time of the pre-pottery Neolithic, people used vessels made of stone, gyps and burnt lime ( Vaisselle blanche ). Finds of  obsidian  tools from  Anatolia  are evidences of early trade relations. Cities of  Hamoukar  and  Emar  played an important role during the late Neolithic and Bronze Age.  Archaeologist s have demonstrated that  civilization  in Syria was one of the most ancient on earth, perhaps preceded by only those of  Mesopotamia .

The earliest recorded indigenous civilisation in the region was the Kingdom of  Ebla  near present-day  Idlib , northern Syria. Ebla appears to have been founded around 3500 BC, and gradually built its fortune through trade with the  Mesopotamian  states of  Sumer ,  Assyria  and  Akkad , as well as with the  Hurrian  and  Hattian  peoples to the northwest, in  Asia Minor . Gifts from  Pharaoh s, found during excavations, confirm Ebla's contact with  Egypt . One of the earliest written texts from Syria is a trading agreement between Vizier  Ibrium  of Ebla and an ambiguous kingdom called  Abarsal  c. 2300 BC. Scholars believe the  language of Ebla  to be among the oldest known written  Semitic languages  after  Akkadian , Recent classifications of the Eblaite language have shown that it was an  East Semitic language , closely related to the  Akkadian language . Ebla was weakened by a long war with  Mari , and the whole of Syria became part of the Mesopotamian  Akkadian Empire  after  Sargon of Akkad  and his grandson  Naram-Sin 's conquests ended Eblan domination over Syria in the first half of the 23rd century BC. By the 21st century BC,  Hurrians  settled the northern east parts of Syria while the rest of the region was dominated by the  Amorite s, Syria was called the Land of the Amurru (Amorites) by their Assyro-Babylonian neighbors. The  Northwest Semitic  language of the  Amorites  is the earliest attested of the  Canaanite language s.  Mari  reemerged during this period, and saw renewed prosperity until conquered by  Hammurabi  of Babylon.  Ugarit  also arose during this time, circa 1800 BC, close to modern  Latakia .  Ugaritic  was a Semitic language loosely related to the Canaanite languages, and developed the  Ugaritic alphabet . the Ugarites kingdom survived until its destruction at the hands of the marauding Indo-European  Sea Peoples  in the 12th century BC. Yamhad  (modern  Aleppo ) dominated northern Syria for two centuries, although Eastern Syria was occupied in the 19th and 18th centuries BC by the  Old Assyrian Empire  ruled by the Amorite Dynasty of  Shamshi-Adad I , and by the  Babylonian Empire  which was founded by Amorites. Yamhad was described in the tablets of Mari as the mightiest state in the near east and as having more vassals than Hammurabi of Babylon. Yamhad imposed its authority over  Alalakh ,  Qatna , the  Hurrians  states and the Euphrates Valley down to the borders with Babylon. The army of Yamhad campaigned as far away as  Dēr  on the border of  Elam  (modern Iran). Yamhad was conquered and destroyed, along with Ebla, by the  Indo-European   Hittites  from  Asia Minor  circa 1600 BC. From this time, Syria became a battle ground for various foreign empires, these being the  Hittite Empire ,  Mitanni  Empire,  Egyptian Empire ,  Middle Assyrian Empire , and to a lesser degree  Babylonia . The Egyptians initially occupied much of the south, while the Hittites, and the Mitanni, much of the north. However, Assyria eventually gained the upper hand, destroying the Mitanni Empire and annexing huge swathes of territory previously held by the Hittites and Babylon.

Around the 14th century BC, various Semitic peoples appeared in the area, such as the semi-nomadic  Suteans  who came into an unsuccessful conflict with  Babylonia  to the east, and the  West Semitic  speaking  Arameans  who subsumed the earlier Amorites. They too were subjugated by Assyria and the Hittites for centuries. The Egyptians fought the Hittites for control over western Syria; the fighting reached its zenith in 1274 BC with the  Battle of Kadesh . The west remained part of the Hittite empire until its destruction c. 1200 BC, while eastern Syria largely became part of the Middle Assyrian Empire, who also annexed much of the west during the reign of  Tiglath-Pileser I  1114–1076 BC. With the destruction of the Hittites and the decline of Assyria in the late 11th century BC, the Aramean tribes gained control of much of the interior, founding states such as  Bit Bahiani ,  Aram-Damascus ,  Hamath ,  Aram-Rehob ,  Aram-Naharaim , and  Luhuti . From this point, the region became known as  Aramea  or  Aram . There was also a synthesis between the Semitic Arameans and the remnants of the Indo-European  Hittites , with the founding of a number of  Syro-Hittite  states centered in north central Aram (Syria) and south central Asia Minor (modern Turkey), including  Palistin ,  Carchemish  and  Sam'al . A  Canaanite  group known as the  Phoenicians  came to dominate the coasts of Syria, (and also Lebanon and northern  Palestine ) from the 13th century BC, founding city states such as  Amrit ,  Simyra ,  Arwad ,  Paltos ,  Ramitha  and  Shuksi . From these coastal regions they eventually spread their influence throughout the  Mediterranean , including building colonies in  Malta , Sicily, the  Iberian peninsula  (modern Spain and  Portugal ), the coasts of North Africa, and most significantly, founding the major city state of  Carthage  (in modern  Tunisia ) in the 9th century BC which was much later to become the center of a major empire, rivaling the  Roman Empire . Syria and the entire  Near East  and beyond then fell to the vast  Neo Assyrian Empire  (911 BC – 605 BC). The Assyrians introduced  Imperial Aramaic  as the  lingua franca  of their empire. This language was to remain dominant in Syria and the entire  Near East  until after the  Arab   Islamic  conquest in the 7th and 8th centuries AD, and was to be a vehicle for the spread of Christianity. The Assyrians named their colonies of Syria and Lebanon  Eber-Nari . Assyrian domination ended after the Assyrians greatly weakened themselves in a series of brutal internal civil wars, followed by an attacking coalition of their former subject peoples; the  Medes ,  Babylonians ,  Chaldea ns,  Persians ,  Scythians  and  Cimmerians . During the fall of Assyria, the  Scythians  ravaged and plundered much of Syria. The last stand of the Assyrian army was at  Carchemish  in northern Syria in 605 BC. The Assyrian Empire was followed by the  Neo-Babylonian Empire  (605 BC – 539 BC).  During this period, Syria became a battle ground between Babylonia and another former Assyrian colony, that of  Egypt . The Babylonians, like their Assyrian relations, were victorious over Egypt.

The  Achaemenid   Persians  took  Syria  from Babylonia as part of their hegemony of Southwest Asia in 539 BC. The Persians, having spent four centuries under Assyrian rule, retained Imperial Aramaic as diplomatic language in the  Achaemenid Empire  (539 BC- 330 BC), and also the Assyrian name of the satrapy of Aram/Syria  Eber-Nari . Syria was conquered by the  Greek   Macedonian Empire , ruled by  Alexander the Great  circa 330 BC, and consequently became  Coele-Syria  province of the  Greek   Seleucid Empire  (323 BC – 64 BC). It was the Greeks who introduced the name "Syria" to the region. Originally an Indo-European corruption of "Assyria" in northern Mesopotamia, the Greeks used this term to describe not only Assyria itself but also the lands to the west which had for centuries been under Assyrian dominion. Thus in the  Greco-Roman  world both the  Arameans  of Syria and the  Assyrians  of Mesopotamia to the east were referred to as "Syrians" or "Syriacs", despite these being distinct peoples in their own right, a confusion which would continue into the modern world. Eventually parts of southern Seleucid Syria were taken by  Judean   Hasmoneans  upon the slow disintegration of the Hellenistic Empire. Syria briefly came under  Armenian  control from 83 BC, with the conquests of  Tigranes the Great , who was welcomed as a savior from the Seleucids and Romans by its people. The Armenians retained control of Syria for two decades before being driven out by the Romans. Pompey the Great  of the  Roman Empire , who captured  Antioch  in 64 BC, turning  Syria  into a Roman province. Palmyra , a rich and sometimes powerful native  Aramaic -speaking kingdom arose in northern Syria in the 2nd century; the Palmyrene established a trade network that made the city one of the richest in the Roman empire. Eventually, in the late 3rd century AD, the Palmyrene king  Odaenathus  defeated the Persian emperor  Shapur I  and controlled the entirety of the Roman East while his successor and widow  Zenobia  established the  Palmyrene Empire , which briefly conquered Egypt, Syria, Palestine, much of Asia Minor, Judah and Lebanon, before being finally brought under Roman control in 273 AD. The northern Mesopotamian  Assyrian  kingdom of  Adiabene  controlled areas of north east Syria between 10 AD and 117 AD, before it was conquered by Rome. The Aramaic language has been found as far afield as  Hadrians Wall  in  Ancient Britain , with inscriptions written by  Assyria n and  Aramean  soldiers of the Roman Empire. Control of Syria eventually passed from the  Romans  to the  Byzantines , with the split in the Roman Empire. The largely  Aramaic -speaking population of Syria during the heyday of the Byzantine empire was probably not exceeded again until the 19th century. Prior to the Arab Islamic Conquest in the 7th century AD, the bulk of the population were  Arameans , but Syria was also home to  Greek  and  Roman  ruling classes,  Assyrians  still dwelt in the north east,  Phoenicians  along the coasts, and  Jewish  and  Armenian  communities was also extant in major cities, with  Nabateans  and pre-Islamic  Arabs  such as the  Lakhmids  and  Ghassanids  dwelling in the deserts of southern Syria.  Syriac Christianity  had taken hold as the major religion, although others still followed  Judaism ,  Mithraism ,  Manicheanism ,  Greco-Roman Religion ,  Canaanite Religion  and  Mesopotamian Religion . Syria's large and prosperous population made Syria one of the most important of the Roman and Byzantine provinces, particularly during the 2nd and 3rd centuries (AD). The Roman Emperor  Alexander Severus , who was emperor from 222 to 235, was an Aramean from Syria. His cousin  Elagabalus , who was emperor from 218 to 222, was also from Syria and his family held hereditary rights to the high priesthood of the Aramean sun god  El-Gabal  at  Emesa  (modern  Homs ) in Syria. Another Roman emperor who was a Syrian was  Philip the Arab  (Marcus Julius Philippus), emperor from 244 to 249. Syria is significant in the  history of Christianity ; Saulus of Tarsus, better known as the  Apostle Paul , was converted on the  Road to Damascus  and emerged as a significant figure in the Christian Church at  Antioch  in ancient Syria, from which he left on many of his missionary journeys. ()

Muhammad 's first interaction with the people and tribes of Syria was during the  Invasion of Dumatul Jandal  in July 626  where he ordered his followers to Invade Duma, because Muhammad received intelligence that some tribes there were involved in highway robbery and preparing to attack Medina itself. William Montgomery Watt  claims that this was the most significant expedition Muhammad ordered at the time, even though it received little notice in the primary sources.  Dumat Al-Jandal  was 500 mi from Medina, and Watt says that there was no immediate threat to Muhammad, other than the possibility that his communications to Syria and supplies to Medina being interrupted. Watt says "It is tempting to suppose that Muhammad was already envisaging something of the expansion which took place after his death", and that the rapid march of his troops must have "impressed all those who heard of it". William Muir  also believes that the expedition was important as Muhammad followed by 1000 men reached the confines of Syria, where distant tribes had now learnt his name, while the political horizon of Muhammad was extended.

By AD 640, Syria was conquered by the  Arab   Rashidun army  led by  Khalid ibn al-Walid . In the mid-7th century, the  Umayyad dynasty , then rulers of the empire, placed the capital of the empire in Damascus. The country's power declined during later Umayyad rule; this was mainly due to totalitarianism, corruption and the resulting revolutions. The Umayyad dynasty was then overthrown in 750 by the  Abbasid dynasty , which moved the capital of empire to  Baghdad . Arabic  – made official under Umayyad rule – became the dominant language, replacing  Greek  and  Aramaic  of the Byzantine era. In 887, the Egypt-based  Tulunids  annexed Syria from the Abbasids, and were later replaced by once the Egypt-based  Ikhshidids  and still later by the  Hamdanid s originating in Aleppo founded by  Sayf al-Dawla .

Sections of Syria were held by French, English,  Italian  and German overlords between 1098 and 1189 AD during the  Crusades  and were known collectively as the  Crusader states  among which the primary one in Syria was the  Principality of Antioch . The coastal mountainous region was also occupied in part by the  Nizari Ismailis , the so-called  Assassins , who had intermittent confrontations and truces with the Crusader States. Later in history when "the Nizaris faced renewed Frankish hostilities, they received timely assistance from the Ayyubids."After a century of Seljuk rule, Syria was largely conquered (1175–1185) by the  Kurdish  warlord  Saladin , founder of the  Ayyubid  dynasty of Egypt.  Aleppo  fell to the  Mongols  of  Hulegu  in January 1260, and Damascus in March, but then Hulegu was forced to break off his attack to return to China to deal with a succession dispute. A few months later, the Mamluks arrived with an army from Egypt and defeated the Mongols in the  Battle of Ain Jalut  in  Galilee . The Mamluk leader,  Baibars , made Damascus a provincial capital. When he died, power was taken by  Qalawun . In the meantime, an emir named Sunqur al-Ashqar had tried to declare himself ruler of Damascus, but he was defeated by Qalawun on 21 June 1280, and fled to northern Syria. Al-Ashqar, who had married a Mongol woman, appealed for help from the Mongols. The  Mongols  of the  Ilkhanate  took the city, but Qalawun persuaded Al-Ashqar to join him, and they fought against the Mongols on 29 October 1281, in the  Second Battle of Homs , which was won by the Mamluks. In 1400, the Muslim  Turco-Mongol  conqueror  Timur Lenk  ( Tamurlane ) invaded Syria, sacked Aleppo and captured Damascus after defeating the Mamluk army. The city's inhabitants were massacred, except for the artisans, who were deported to  Samarkand . Timur-Lenk also conducted specific massacres of the  Aramean  and  Assyrian  Christian populations, greatly reducing their numbers. By the end of the 15th century, the discovery of a sea route from Europe to the Far East ended the need for an  overland trade route  through Syria.

In 1516, the  Ottoman Empire  invaded the Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt, conquering Syria, and incorporating it into its empire. The Ottoman system was not burdensome to Syrians because the Turks respected Arabic as the language of the  Quran , and accepted the mantle of defenders of the faith. Damascus was made the major entrepot for  Mecca , and as such it acquired a holy character to Muslims, because of the beneficial results of the countless pilgrims who passed through on the hajj, the pilgrimage to Mecca. Ottoman administration followed a system that led to peaceful coexistence. Each  ethno-religious  minority –  Arab   Shia Muslim ,  Arab   Sunni Muslim ,  Aramean - Syriac Orthodox ,  Greek Orthodox ,  Maronite Christians ,  Assyrian Christians ,  Armenians ,  Kurds  and  Jews  – constituted a  millet . The religious heads of each community administered all personal status laws and performed certain civil functions as well. In 1831,  Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt  renounced his loyalty to the Empire and overran  Ottoman Syria , capturing Damascus. His short-term rule over the domain attempted to change the demographics and social structure of the region: he brought thousands of Egyptian villagers to populate the plains of  Southern Syria , rebuilt  Jaffa  and settled it with veteran Egyptian soldiers aiming to turn it into a regional capital, and he crushed  peasant  and Druze rebellions and deported non-loyal tribesmen. By 1840, however, he had to surrender the area back to the Ottomans. From 1864,  Tanzimat  reforms were applied on Ottoman Syria, carving out the provinces (vilayets) of  Aleppo ,  Zor ,  Beirut  and  Damascus Vilayet ;  Mutasarrifate of Mount Lebanon  was created, as well, and soon afterthe  Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem  was given a separate status. During  World War I , the  Ottoman Empire  entered the conflict on the side of Germany and the  Austro-Hungarian Empire . It ultimately suffered defeat and loss of control of the entire  Near East  to the  British Empire  and  French Empire . During the conflict,  genocide  against indigenous Christian peoples was carried out by the Ottomans and their allies in the form of the  Armenian Genocide  and  Assyrian Genocide , of which  Deir ez-Zor , in Ottoman Syria, was the final destination of these death marches. In the midst of  World War I , two  Allied  diplomats (Frenchman  François Georges-Picot  and  Briton   Mark Sykes ) secretly agreed on the post-war division of the Ottoman Empire into respective zones of influence in the  Sykes-Picot Agreement  of 1916. Initially, the two territories were separated by a border that ran in an almost straight line from Jordan to  Iran . However, the discovery of oil in the region of  Mosul  just before the end of the war led to yet another negotiation with France in 1918 to cede this region to 'Zone B', or the British zone of influence. This border was later recognized internationally when Syria became a  League of Nations  mandate in 1920 and has not changed to date.

In 1920, a short-lived independent  Kingdom of Syria  was established under  Faisal I  of the  Hashemite  family. However, his rule over Syria ended after only a few months, following the  Battle of Maysalun . French troops occupied Syria later that year after the  San Remo conference  proposed that the League of Nations put Syria under a French mandate. General Gouraud had according to his secretary de Caix two options: "Either build a Syrian nation that does not exist... by smoothing the rifts which still divide it" or "cultivate and maintain all the phenomena, which require our abitration that these divisions give". De Caix added "I must say only the second option interests me". This is what Gouraud did. In 1925,  Sultan al-Atrash  led  a revolt  that broke out in the  Druze Mountain  and spread to engulf the whole of Syria and parts of Lebanon. Al-Atrash won several battles against the French, notably the  Battle of al-Kafr  on 21 July 1925, the  Battle of al-Mazraa  on 2–3 August 1925, and the battles of Salkhad,  al-Musayfirah  and Suwayda. France sent thousands of troops from Morocco and Senegal, leading the French to regain many cities, although resistance lasted until the spring of 1927. The French sentenced Sultan al-Atrash to death, but he had escaped with the rebels to Transjordan and was eventually pardoned. He returned to Syria in 1937 after the signing of the Syrian-French Treaty. Syria and France negotiated a  treaty of independence  in September 1936, and  Hashim al-Atassi  was the first president to be elected under the first incarnation of the modern republic of Syria. However, the treaty never came into force because the French Legislature refused to ratify it. With the fall of France in 1940 during  World War II , Syria came under the control of  Vichy France  until the British and Free French occupied the country in the  Syria-Lebanon campaign  in July 1941. Continuing pressure from Syrian nationalists and the British forced the French to evacuate their troops in April 1946, leaving the country in the hands of a republican government that had been formed during the mandate.

Upheaval dominated Syrian politics from independence through the late 1960s. In May 1948, Syrian forces invaded  Palestine , together with other Arab states, and immediately attacked Jewish settlements. Their president  Shukri al-Quwwatli  instructed his troops in the front, “to destroy the Zionists". The Invasion purpose was prevention of the establishment of the State of Israel. Defeat in this war was one of several trigger factors for the  March 1949 Syrian coup d'état  by Col.  Husni al-Za'im , described as the first military overthrow of the  Arab World  since the start of the Second World War. This was soon followed by another overthrow, by Col.  Sami al-Hinnawi , who was himself quickly deposed by Col.  Adib Shishakli , all within the same year. Shishakli eventually abolished multipartyism altogether, but was himself overthrown in a  1954 coup  and the parliamentary system was restored. However, by this time, power was increasingly concentrated in the military and security establishment. The weakness of Parliamentary institutions and the mismanagement of the economy led to unrest and the influence of  Nasserism  and other ideologies. There was fertile ground for various  Arab nationalist ,  Syrian nationalist , and socialist movements, which represented disaffected elements of society. Notably included were religious minorities, who demanded radical reform. In November 1956, as a direct result of the  Suez Crisis , Syria signed a pact with the  Soviet Union . This gave a foothold for Communist influence within the government in exchange for military equipment.  Turkey  then became worried about this increase in the strength of Syrian military technology, as it seemed feasible that Syria might attempt to retake  İskenderun . Only heated debates in the United Nations lessened the threat of war. On 1 February 1958, Syrian President  Shukri al-Quwatli  and Egypt's Nasser announced the merging of Egypt and Syria, creating the  United Arab Republic , and all Syrian political parties, as well as the communists therein, ceased overt activities. Meanwhile, a group of Syrian Ba'athist officers, alarmed by the party's poor position and the increasing fragility of the union, decided to form a secret Military Committee; its initial members were Lieutenant-Colonel  Muhammad Umran , Major  Salah Jadid  and Captain  Hafez al-Assad . Syria seceded from the union with Egypt on 28 September 1961, after a  coup .

The ensuing instability, following the  1961 coup  culminated in the  8 March 1963 Ba'athist coup . The takeover was engineered by members of the  Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party , led by  Michel Aflaq  and  Salah al-Din al-Bitar . The new Syrian cabinet was dominated by Ba'ath members. On 23 February 1966, the Military Committee carried out an  intra-party overthrow , imprisoned President  Amin Hafiz  and designated a regionalist, civilian Ba'ath government on 1 March. Although  Nureddin al-Atassi  became the formal head of state,  Salah Jadid  was Syria's effective ruler from 1966 until November 1970, when he was deposed by  Hafez al-Assad , who at the time was Minister of Defense.  The coup led to a split within the original  pan-Arab Ba'ath Party : one  Iraqi-led ba'ath movement  (ruled Iraq from 1968 to 2003) and one  Syrian-led ba'ath movement  was established. In the first part of 1967, a low-key state of war existed between Syria and Israel. Conflict over Israeli cultivation of land in the Demilitarized Zone led to  7 April prewar aerial clashes  between Israel and Syria. After Israel launched a  preemptive strike  on Egypt to begin the  Six-Day War , Syria joined the war and attacked against Israel as well. In the final days of the war, Israel turned its attention to Syria, capturing two-thirds of the  Golan Heights  in under 48 hours. The defeat caused a split between Jadid and Assad over what steps to take next. Disagreement developed between Jadid, who controlled the party apparatus, and Assad, who controlled the military. The 1970 retreat of Syrian forces sent to aid the  PLO  during the " Black September " hostilities with Jordan reflected this disagreement. The power struggle culminated in the November 1970  Syrian Corrective Revolution , a bloodless military overthrow that installed Hafez al-Assad as the strongman of the government. On 6 October 1973, Syria and Egypt initiated the  Yom Kippur War  against Israel. The  Israel Defense Forces  reversed the initial Syrian gains and pushed deeper into Syrian territory. In early 1976, Syria entered Lebanon, beginning the thirty-year  Syrian military occupation . Over the following 15 years of  civil war , Syria fought for control over Lebanon, and attempted to stop Israel from taking over in southern Lebanon, through extensive use of proxy militias. Syria then remained in Lebanon until 2005. In the late 1970s, an  Islamist uprising  by the  Muslim Brotherhood  was aimed against the government. Islamists attacked civilians and off-duty military personnel, leading security forces to also kill civilians in retaliatory strikes. The uprising had reached its climax in the 1982  Hama massacre , when some 10,000 – 40,000 people were killed by regular  Syrian Army  troops. In a major shift in relations with both other  Arab states  and the Western world, Syria participated in the US-led  Gulf War  against Saddam Hussein. Syria participated in the multilateral  Madrid Conference of 1991 , and during the 1990s engaged in negotiations with Israel. These negotiations failed, and there have been no further direct Syrian-Israeli talks since President  Hafez al-Assad 's meeting with then President  Bill Clinton  in Geneva in March 2000. Hafez al-Assad died on 10 June 2000. His son,  Bashar al-Assad , was elected President in  an election  in which he ran unopposed. His election saw the birth of the  Damascus Spring  and hopes of reform, but by autumn 2001, the authorities had suppressed the movement, imprisoning some of its leading intellectuals. Instead, reforms have been limited to some market reforms. On 5 October 2003, Israel  bombed a site near Damascus , claiming it was a terrorist training facility for members of  Islamic Jihad . In March 2004, Syrian Kurds and Arabs  clashed  in the northeastern city of al-Qamishli. Signs of rioting were seen in the cities of Qamishli and Hasakeh. In 2005, Syria ended its occupation of Lebanon. On 6 September 2007, foreign jet fighters, suspected as Israeli, reportedly carried out  Operation Orchard  against a suspected  nuclear reactor  under construction by  North Korean  technicians.

The ongoing  Syrian Civil War  was inspired by the  Arab Spring  revolutions. It began in 2011 as a chain of peaceful protests, followed by a crackdown by the Syrian Army. In July 2011, army defectors declared the formation of the  Free Syrian Army  and began forming fighting units. The opposition is dominated by  Sunni  Muslims, whereas the leading government figures are  Alawites . According to various sources, including the United Nations, up to 100,000 people had been killed by June 2013, including 11,000 children. To escape the violence, 4.9 million  Syrian refugees  have fled to neighboring countries of Jordan, Iraq, Lebanon, and Turkey. An estimated 450,000  Syrian Christians  have fled their homes. As the civil war has dragged on, there have been worries that the country could become fragmented and cease to function as a state. The Syrian Network for Human Rights (SNHR) reported on November 14, 2016: "the total number of victims who were killed at the hands of the Syrian regime amounts to 188,279 civilians."

Syria lies between latitudes  32°  and  38° N , and longitudes  35°  and  43° E . It consists mostly of arid plateau, although the northwest part of the country bordering the Mediterranean is fairly green. The Northeast of the country " al-Jazira " and the South " Hawran " are important agricultural areas. The  Euphrates , Syria's most important river, crosses the country in the east. It is considered to be one of the fifteen states that comprise the so-called " Cradle of civilization ". Its land straddles the "northwest of the  Arabian plate ". The climate in Syria is dry and hot, and winters are mild. Because of the country's elevation, snowfall does occasionally occur during winter. Petroleum in commercial quantities was first discovered in the northeast in 1956. The most important oil fields are those of Suwaydiyah, Qaratshui, Rumayian, and Tayyem, near  Dayr az–Zawr . The fields are a natural extension of the Iraqi fields of  Mosul  and  Kirkuk . Petroleum became Syria's leading natural resource and chief export after 1974. Natural gas was discovered at the field of Jbessa in 1940.

Syria is formally a  unitary  republic. The  constitution  adopted in 2012 effectively transformed Syria into a  semi-presidential  republic due to the constitutional right for the election of individuals who do not form part of the  National Progressive Front . The  President  is  Head of State  and the  Prime Minister  is  Head of Government . The legislature, the Peoples Council, is the body responsible for passing laws, approving government  appropriations  and debating policy. In the event of a  vote of no confidence  by a simple majority, the Prime Minister is required to tender the resignation of their government to the President. The  executive branch  consists of the president, two  vice presidents , the prime minister, and the  Council of Ministers  (cabinet). The constitution requires the president to be a Muslim but does not make Islam the state religion. The constitution gives the president the right to appoint ministers, to declare war and  state of emergency , to issue laws (which, except in the case of emergency, require ratification by the People's Council), to declare  amnesty , to amend the constitution, and to appoint civil servants and military personnel. According to the 2012 constitution, the president is elected by Syrian citizens in a direct election. Syria's  legislative branch  is the unicameral  People's Council . Under the previous constitution, Syria did not hold multi-party elections for the legislature, with two-thirds of the seats automatically allocated to the ruling coalition. On 7 May 2012, Syria held its first elections in which parties outside the ruling coalition could take part. Seven new political parties took part in the elections, of which  Popular Front for Change and Liberation  was the largest opposition party. The armed anti-government rebels, however, chose not to field candidates and called on their supporters to boycott the elections. The President is currently the Regional Secretary of the  Ba'ath party in Syria  and leader of the  National Progressive Front  governing coalition. Outside of the coalition are 14 illegal  Kurdish  political parties. Syria's  judicial branch es include the  Supreme Constitutional Court , the  High Judicial Council , the  Court of Cassation , and the  State Security  Courts.  Islamic  jurisprudence is a main source of legislation and Syria's judicial system has elements of  Ottoman ,  French , and  Islamic  laws. Syria has three levels of courts: courts of first instance, courts of appeals, and the constitutional court, the highest  tribunal . Religious courts handle questions of personal and family law. The Supreme State Security Court (SSSC) was abolished by President Bashar al-Assad by legislative decree No. 53 on 21 April 2011. The Personal Status Law 59 of 1953 (amended by Law 34 of 1975) is essentially a codified sharia. Article 3(2) of the 1973  constitution  declares Islamic jurisprudence a main source of legislation. The Code of Personal Status is applied to Muslims by sharia courts. As a result of the ongoing civil war, various alternative governments were formed, including the  Syrian Interim Government , the  Democratic Union Party  and localised regions governed by  sharia law . Representatives of the Syrian Interim government were invited to take up Syria's seat at the  Arab League  on 28 March 2013 and was recognised as the "sole representative of the Syrian people" by several nations including the United States, United Kingdom and France. Parliamentary elections were held on 13 April 2016 in the government-controlled areas of Syria, for all 250 seats of Syria's unicameral legislature, the Majlis al-Sha'ab, or the  People's Council of Syria . Even before results had been announced, several nations, including Germany, the United States and the United Kingdom, have declared their refusal to accept the results, largely citing it "not representing the will of the Syrian people. However, representatives of the Russian Federation have voiced their support of this election's results. Syria's  system of government is considered to be non-democratic by the North American NGO  Freedom House .

The situation for human rights in Syria has long been a significant concern among independent organizations such as  Human Rights Watch , who in 2010 referred to the country's record as "among the worst in the world." The US State Department funded  Freedom House  ranked Syria "Not Free" in its annual  Freedom in the World  survey. The authorities are accused of arresting democracy and human rights activists,  censoring  websites, detaining bloggers, and imposing travel bans.  Arbitrary detention ,  torture , and disappearances are widespread. Although Syria's constitution guarantees gender equality, critics say that personal statutes laws and the penal code discriminate against women and girls. Moreover, it also grants leniency for so-called ' Honour killing '. As of 9 November 2011 during the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad, the United Nations reported that of the over 3500 total deaths, over 250 deaths were children as young as 2 years old, and that boys as young as 11 years old have been gang raped by security services officers. People opposing President Assad's rule  claim that more than 200, mostly civilians, were massacred and about 300 injured in Hama in shelling by the Government forces on 12 July 2012. In August 2013 the government was suspected of using chemical weapons against its civilians. US Secretary of State  John Kerry  said it was "undeniable" that chemical weapons had been used in the country and that President Bashar al-Assad's forces had committed a "moral obscenity" against his own people. "Make no mistake," Kerry said. "President Obama believes there must be accountability for those who would use the world's most heinous weapon against the world's most vulnerable people. Nothing today is more serious, and nothing is receiving more serious scrutiny". The Emergency Law, effectively suspending most constitutional protections, was in effect from 1963 until 21 April 2011. It was justified by the government in the light of the continuing war with Israel over the Golan Heights. In August 2014,  UN Human Rights  chief  Navi Pillay  criticized the international community over its "paralysis" in dealing with the more than 3-year-old  civil war  gripping the country, which by 30 April 2014, had resulted in 191,369 deaths with war crimes, according to Pillay, being committed with total impunity on all sides in the conflict. Minority  Alawite s and  Christians  are being increasingly targeted by Islamists and other groups fighting in the Syrian civil war.

The  President of Syria  is commander in chief of the Syrian armed forces, comprising some 400,000 troops upon mobilization. The military is a conscripted force; males serve in the military upon reaching the age of 18. The obligatory military service period is being decreased over time, in 2005 from two and a half years to two years, in 2008 to 21 months and in 2011 to year and a half. About 20,000 Syrian soldiers were deployed in Lebanon until 27 April 2005, when the last of Syria's troops left the country after three decades. The breakup of the Soviet Union—long the principal source of training, material, and credit for the Syrian forces—may have slowed Syria's ability to acquire modern military equipment. It has an arsenal of surface-to-surface missiles. In the early 1990s,  Scud -C missiles with a 500 km range were procured from  North Korea , and Scud-D, with a range of up to 700 km, is allegedly being developed by Syria with the help of North Korea and  Iran , according to Zisser. Syria received significant financial aid from  Arab states of the Persian Gulf  as a result of its participation in the  Persian Gulf War , with a sizable portion of these funds earmarked for  military spending .

Ensuring national security, increasing influence among its  Arab  neighbors, and securing the return of the  Golan Heights , have been the primary goals of Syria's foreign policy. At many points in its history, Syria has seen virulent tension with its geographically cultural neighbors, such as Turkey, Israel, Iraq, and Lebanon. Syria enjoyed an improvement in relations with several of the states in its region in the 21st century, prior to the  Arab Spring  and the  Syrian Civil War . Since the ongoing civil war of 2011, and associated killings and human rights abuses, Syria has been increasingly isolated from the countries in the region, and the wider international community. Diplomatic relations have been severed with several countries including: Britain, Canada, France, Italy, Germany, Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, the United States, Belgium, Spain, and the Arab states of the Persian Gulf. From the Arab league, Syria continues to maintain diplomatic relations with  Algeria ,  Egypt , Iraq, Lebanon,  Sudan  and  Yemen . Syria's violence against civilians has also seen it suspended from the  Arab League  and the  Organisation of Islamic Cooperation  in 2012. Syria continues to foster good relations with its traditional allies, Iran and Russia, who are among the few countries which have supported the Syrian government in its conflict with the  Syrian opposition . Syria is included in the European Union's  European Neighbourhood Policy  (ENP) which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.

In 1939, while Syria was still a French mandate the French ceded the  Sanjak of Alexandretta  to  Turkey  as part of a treaty of friendship in World War II. In order to facilitate this, a faulty election was done in which ethnic  Turks  who were originally from the Sanjak but lived in  Adana  and other areas near the border in Turkey came to vote in the elections, shifting the election in favor of secession. Through this, the  Hatay Province  of Turkey was formed. The move by the French was very controversial in Syria, and only 5 years later Syria became independent. Israel unilaterally annexed the Golan Heights in 1981, although the Syrian government continues to demand the return of this territory. The  Syrian occupation of Lebanon  began in 1976 as a result of the  civil war  and ended in April 2006 in response to domestic and international pressure after the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister,  Rafik Hariri .

Syria is divided into 14  governorates , which are sub-divided into 61  districts , which are further divided into sub-districts.

Agrarian reform measures were introduced into Syria which consisted of three interrelated programs: Legislation regulation the relationship between agriculture laborers and landowners: legislation governing the ownership and use of private and state domain land and directing the economic organization of peasants; and measures reorganizing agricultural production under state control. Despite high levels of inequality in land ownership these reforms allowed for progress in redistribution of land from 1958 to 1961 than any other reforms in Syria's history, since independence. The first law passed (Law 134; passed September 4, 1958) in response to concern about peasant mobilization and expanding peasants' rights. This was designed to strengthen the position of sharecroppers and agricultural laborers in relation to land owners. This law lead to the creation of the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, which announced the implementation of new laws that would allow the regulation of working condition especially for women and adolescents, set hours of work, and introduce the principle of minimum wage for paid laborers and an equitable division of harvest for sharecroppers. Furthermore, it obligated landlords to honor both written and oral contracts, established collective barging, contained provisions for workers' compensation, health, housing, and employment services. Law 134 was not designed strictly to protect workers. It also acknowledged the rights of landlords to form their own syndicates.

The  Telecommunications in Syria  are overseen by the  Ministry of Communications and Technology . In addition,  Syrian Telecom  plays an integral role in the distribution of government internet access. The  Syrian Electronic Army  serves as a pro-government military faction in cyberspace and has been long considered an enemy of the  hacktivist  group  Anonymous . Because of  internet censorship  laws, 13,000 internet  activists  have been arrested between March 2011 and August 2012.

As of 2015, the Syrian economy relies upon inherently unreliable revenue sources such as dwindling customs and income taxes which are heavily bolstered by lines of credit from Iran. In May 2015,  ISIS  captured Syria's phosphate mines, one of the Assad regime's last chief sources of income. The following month, ISIS blew up a gas pipeline to Damascus that was used to generate heating and electricity in Damascus and Homs; "the name of its game for now is denial of key resources to the regime" an analyst stated. In addition, ISIS is closing in on Shaer gas field and three other facilities in the area—Hayan, Jihar and Ebla—with the loss of these western gas fields having the potential to cause Iran to further subsidize the Assad regime.

Syria's petroleum industry has been subject to sharp decline. In September 2014, ISIS was producing more oil than the regime at 80000 oilbbl/d compared to the regime's 17000 oilbbl/d with the Syrian Oil Ministry stating that by the end of 2014, oil production had plunged further to 9329 oilbbl/d; ISIS has since captured a further oil field, leading to a projected oil production of 6829 oilbbl/d. In the third year of the Syrian Civil War, the deputy economy minister Salman Hayan stated that Syria's two main oil refineries were operating at less than 10% capacity. Historically, the country produced heavy-grade oil from fields located in the northeast since the late 1960s. In the early 1980s, light-grade, low-sulphur oil was discovered near  Deir ez-Zor  in eastern Syria. Syria's rate of oil production has decreased dramatically from a peak close to 600000 oilbbl/d (bpd) in 1995 down to less than 182500 oilbbl/d in 2012. Since 2012 the production has decreased even more, reaching in 2014 32000 oilbbl/d (bpd). Official figures quantity the production in 2015 at 27000 oilbbl/d,  but those figures have to be taken with precaution because it is difficult to estimate the oil that is currently produced in the rebel held areas. Prior to the uprising, more than 90% of Syrian oil exports were to EU countries, with the remainder going to Turkey.  Oil and gas revenues constituted in 2012 around 20% of total GDP and 25% of total government revenue.

Syria has four international airports (Damascus, Aleppo, Lattakia and Kamishly), which serve as hubs for  Syrian Air  and are also served by a variety of foreign carriers. The majority of Syrian cargo is carried by  Chemins de Fer Syriens  (the Syrian railway company), which links up with  Turkish State Railways  (the Turkish counterpart). For a relatively underdeveloped country, Syria's railway infrastructure is well maintained with many express services and modern trains. The road network in Syria is 69,873 km long, including 1,103 km of expressways. The country also has 900 km of navigable but not economically significant waterways.

Syria is a semiarid country with scarce water resources. The largest water consuming sector in Syria is  agriculture . Domestic water use stands at only about 9% of total water use. A big challenge for Syria is its high population growth with a rapidly increasing demand for urban and industrial water. In 2006 the population of Syria was 19.4 million with a growth rate of 2.7%.

Most people live in the  Euphrates River  valley and along the coastal plain, a fertile strip between the coastal mountains and the desert. Overall population density in Syria is about 99 per square kilometre (258 per square mile). According to the World Refugee Survey 2008, published by the U. S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, Syria hosted a population of refugees and asylum seekers numbering approximately 1,852,300. The vast majority of this population was from Iraq (1,300,000), but sizeable populations from   Palestine  (543,400) and  Somalia  (5,200) also lived in the country. In what the UN has described as "the biggest humanitarian emergency of our era", about 9.5 million Syrians, half the population, have been displaced since the outbreak of the  Syrian Civil War  in March 2011; 4 million are outside the country as  refugees .

Syrians are an overall indigenous  Levant ine people, closely related to their immediate neighbours, like  Lebanese  people,  Palestinians ,  Iraqi s,  Maltese  and  Jordanians . Syria has a population of approximately  (2014 est.)  Syrian Arabs , together with some 600,000  Palestinian  Arabs, make up roughly 74% of the population (if  Syriac Christians  are excluded). The indigenous Christian  Western Aramaic -speakers and  Assyrians  are numbered around 400,000 people, with the Western Aramaic-speakers living all over the country, particularly in major urban centers, while the Assyrians mainly reside in the north and northeast (Homs, Aleppo, Qamishli, Hasakah). Many (particularly the Assyrian group) still retain several  Neo-Aramaic  dialects as spoken and written languages, while villagers of  Ma'loula ,  Jubb'adin  and  Bakh'a  still retain  Western Aramaic . The second largest ethnic group in Syria are the  Kurds . They constitute about 9% to 10%  of the population, or approximately 1.6 million people (including 40,000  Yazidis  Syria was once home to a substantial population of  Jews , with large communities in Damascus, Aleppo, and Qamishii. Due to a combination of persecution in Syria and opportunities elsewhere, the Jews began to emigrate in the second half of the 19th century to Great Britain, the United States, and Israel. The process was completed with the establishment of the state of Israel in 1948. Today only a few Jews remain in Syria. The largest concentration of the  Syrian diaspora  outside the  Arab world  is in  Brazil , which has millions of people of Arab and other Near Eastern ancestries. Brazil is the first country in the Americas to offer humanitarian visas to Syrian  refugee s. The majority of  Arab Argentine s are from either Lebanese or Syrian background.

Sunni Muslims  make up about 74% of Syria's population and Sunni Arabs account for 59–60% of the population, most Kurds (8.5%) and most Turkoman (3%)  are also Sunni, while 13% of Syrians are  Shia Muslims  (particularly  Alawite ,  Twelvers , and  Ismailis  but also Arabs, Kurds and Turkoman), 10% Christian (the majority Antiochian Orthodox, the rest including Greek Catholic, Assyrian Church of the East, Armenian Orthodox, Protestants and other denominations), and 3%  Druze . Druze number around 500,000, and concentrate mainly in the southern area of  Jabal al-Druze . President Bashar al-Assad's family is Alawite and Alawites dominate the government of Syria and hold key military positions. In May 2013,  SOHR  stated that out of 94,000 killed during the  Syrian Civil War , at least 41,000 were Alawites. Christians (2.5 million), a sizable number of whom are found among Syria's population of  Palestinian  refugees, are divided into several groups.  Chalcedonian   Antiochian Orthodox  make up 45.7% of the Christian population; the Catholics ( Melkite ,  Armenian Catholic ,  Syriac Catholic ,  Maronite ,  Chaldean Catholic  and  Latin ) make up 16.2%; the  Armenian Apostolic Church  10.9%, the  Syriac Orthodox  make up 22.4%;  Assyrian Church of the East  and several smaller Christian denominations account for the remainder. Many Christian  [monasteries](List of Monasteries in Syria)  also exist. Many Christian Syrians belong to a high socio-economic class.

Arabic  is the  official language . Several modern  Arabic dialects  are used in everyday life, most notably  Levantine  in the west and  Mesopotamian  in the northeast.  Kurdish  (in its  Kurmanji  form) is widely spoken in the  Kurdish  regions of Syria.  Armenian  and  Turkish  ( South Azeri  dialect) are spoken among the  Armenian  and  Turkmen  minorities. Aramaic  was the  lingua franca  of the region before the advent of  Arabic , and is still spoken among  Assyrians , and  Classical Syriac  is still used as the liturgical language of  various Syriac Christian denominations . Most remarkably,  Western Neo-Aramaic  is still spoken in the village of  Ma'loula  as well as two neighboring villages, 35 mi northeast of Damascus. English and French are widely spoken as a second language, but English is more often used.

Syria is a traditional society with a long cultural history. Importance is placed on family, religion, education, self-discipline and respect. Syrians' taste for the traditional arts is expressed in dances such as the al-Samah, the  Dabkeh  in all their variations, and the sword dance. Marriage ceremonies and the births of children are occasions for the lively demonstration of folk customs.

The  literature of Syria  has contributed to  Arabic literature  and has a proud tradition of oral and written poetry. Syrian writers, many of whom migrated to Egypt, played a crucial role in the  nahda  or Arab literary and cultural revival of the 19th century. Prominent contemporary Syrian writers include, among others,  Adonis ,  Muhammad Maghout ,  Haidar Haidar ,  Ghada al-Samman ,  Nizar Qabbani  and  Zakariyya Tamer . Ba'ath Party rule, since the  1966 coup , has brought about renewed censorship. In this context, the genre of the historical novel, spearheaded by  Nabil Sulayman ,  Fawwaz Haddad ,  Khyri al-Dhahabi  and  Nihad Siris , is sometimes used as a means of expressing dissent, critiquing the present through a depiction of the past. Syrian  [folk narrative](List of folklores) , as a subgenre of historical fiction, is imbued with  magical realism , and is also used as a means of veiled criticism of the present.  Salim Barakat , a Syrian émigré living in Sweden, is one of the leading figures of the genre. Contemporary Syrian literature also encompasses science fiction and futuristic  utopia e ( Nuhad Sharif ,  Talib Umran ), which may also serve as media of dissent.

The Syrian music scene , in particular that of Damascus, has long been among the Arab world's most important, especially in the field of  classical Arab music . Syria has produced several pan-Arab stars, including  Asmahan ,  Farid al-Atrash  and singer  Lena Chamamyan . The city of Aleppo is known for its  muwashshah , a form of  Andalous  sung poetry popularized by  Sabri Moudallal , as well as for popular stars like  Sabah Fakhri . Television  was first introduced to Syria in 1960, when Syria and Egypt (which adopted television that same year) were part of the  United Arab Republic . It broadcast in black and white until 1976.  Syrian soap operas  have considerable market penetration throughout the eastern Arab world. Nearly all of  Syria's media  outlets are state-owned, and the Ba'ath Party controls nearly all newspapers. The authorities operate several intelligence agencies, among them  Shu'bat al-Mukhabarat al-'Askariyya , employing a large number of operatives.  Since the  Syrian Civil War  many of Syria's artists, poets, writers and activists have remained incarcerated, including famed cartoonist  Akram Raslam .

The most popular sports in Syria are  football , basketball, swimming, and tennis. Damascus was home to the fifth and seventh  Pan Arab Games . Many popular football teams are based in Damascus, Aleppo, Homs, Latakia, etc. The  Abbasiyyin Stadium  in Damascus is home to the  Syrian national football team . The team enjoyed some success, having qualified for four  Asian Cup  competitions. The team had its first international on 20 November 1949, losing to  Turkey  7–0. The team was ranked 101st in the world by  FIFA  as of June 2016.

Linked to the regions of Syria where a specific dish has originated, Syrian cuisine is rich and varied in its ingredients. Syrian food mostly consists of Southern Mediterranean, Greek, and Southwest Asian dishes. Some Syrian dishes also evolved from Turkish and French cooking: dishes like  shish kebab , stuffed zucchini/courgette,  yabra'  (stuffed grape leaves, the word yapra' derıves from the  Turkish  word 'yaprak' meaning leaf). The main dishes that form Syrian cuisine are  kibbeh ,  hummus ,  tabbouleh ,  fattoush ,  labneh ,  shawarma ,  mujaddara ,  shanklish ,  pastırma ,  sujuk  and  baklava .  Baklava  is made of  filo  pastry filled with chopped nuts and soaked in  honey . Syrians often serve selections of appetizers, known as  meze , before the main course.  Za'atar ,  minced beef , and cheese  manakish  are popular  hors d'œuvres . The Arabic flatbread  khubz  is always eaten together with  meze . Drinks in Syria vary, depending on the time of day and the occasion.  Arabic coffee , also known as  Turkish coffee , is the most well-known hot drink, usually prepared in the morning at breakfast or in the evening. It is usually served for guests or after food.  Arak , an alcoholic drink, is also a well-known beverage served mostly on special occasions. More examples of Syrian beverages include  Ayran ,  Jallab ,  White coffee , and a locally manufactured beer called Al Shark.

Education is free and compulsory from ages 6 to 12. Schooling consists of 6 years of primary education followed by a 3-year general or  vocational  training period and a 3-year academic or vocational program. The second 3-year period of academic training is required for university  admission . Total enrollment at  post-secondary  schools is over 150,000. The  literacy  rate of Syrians aged 15 and older is 90.7% for males and 82.2% for females. Since 1967, all schools, colleges, and universities have been under close government supervision by the  Ba'ath Party . There are 6 state universities in Syria and 15 private universities. The top two state universities are  University of Damascus  (180,000 students) and  University of Aleppo . The top private universities in Syria are:  Syrian Private University ,  Arab International University ,  University of Kalamoon  and  International University for Science and Technology . There are also many higher institutes in Syria, like the  Higher Institute of Business Administration , which offer undergraduate and graduate programs in business. According to the  Webometrics Ranking of World Universities , the top-ranking universities in the country are  Damascus University  (3540th worldwide), the  University of Aleppo  (7176th) and  Tishreen University  (7968th).

In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 3.4% of the country's GDP. In 2008, there were 14.9 physicians and 18.5 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants. The life expectancy at birth was 75.7 years in 2010, or 74.2 years for males and 77.3 years for females.