United States presidential election, 2012
The 'United States presidential election of 2012' was the 57th quadrennial  American presidential election . It was held on Tuesday, November 6, 2012. The  Democratic  nominee, incumbent  President   Barack Obama , and his  running mate ,  Vice President   Joe Biden , were elected to a second term, defeating the  Republican  nominee, former  Governor of Massachusetts   Mitt Romney  and his running mate,  Representative  and eventual  House Speaker   Paul Ryan  of  Wisconsin . As the incumbent president, Obama secured the Democratic nomination with no serious opposition. The Republican Party was more fractured; Mitt Romney was consistently competitive in the polls, but faced challenges from a number of more conservative contenders whose popularity each fluctuated, often besting Romney's. Romney effectively secured the nomination by early May as the economy improved, albeit at a persistently laggard rate. The campaign was marked by a sharp rise in fundraising, including from new nominally independent  Super PACs . The campaigns focused heavily on domestic issues: debate centered largely around sound responses to the  Great Recession  in terms of economic recovery and job creation. Other issues included long-term federal budget issues, the future of  social insurance programs , and the  Affordable Care Act .  Foreign policy  was also discussed including the phase-out of the  Iraq War , the size of and spending on the military, preventing Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons, and appropriate counteractions to terrorism. Obama defeated Romney, winning both the  [popular vote](List of United States presidential elections by popular vote margin)  and the  electoral college , with 332 electoral votes to Romney's 206. Obama carried all states and districts (among states that allocate electoral votes by district) that he had won in the  2008 presidential election  except  North Carolina ,  Indiana , and  Nebraska's 2nd congressional district . As such, his margin of victory decreased from 2008. Consequently, Obama became the first incumbent since  Franklin D. Roosevelt  in  1944  to win reelection with fewer electoral votes and a lower popular vote percentage. Not since  1820  had three consecutive American presidents succeeded in securing reelection.

The  2010 Census  changed the  electoral vote  apportionment for the presidential elections from 2012 to 2020 in the states listed below:Eight states (Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Nevada, South Carolina, Texas, Utah, and Washington) gained votes due to reapportionment based on the 2010 Census. Ten states (Illinois, Iowa, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, and Pennsylvania) lost votes. This gave the Democratic Party a net loss of six electoral votes in states won by Democratic nominees in the previous three presidential elections, rendering the party a national total of 242 electoral votes. Conversely, the Republican Party achieved a net gain of six electoral votes in states won by Republican nominees in the previous three presidential elections, rendering the Republican Party a national total of 180 electoral votes.

In 2011, several state legislatures passed new voting laws, especially pertaining to voter identification, with the stated purpose of combating  voter fraud ; the laws were attacked, however, by the Democratic Party as attempts to suppress voting among its supporters and to improve the Republican Party's presidential prospects. Florida, Georgia, Ohio, Tennessee, and West Virginia's state legislatures approved measures to shorten early voting periods. Florida and Iowa barred all felons from voting. Kansas, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Wisconsin state legislatures passed  laws requiring voters to have government-issued IDs  before they could cast their ballots. This meant, typically, that people without driver's licenses or passports had to gain new forms of ID. Obama, the  NAACP , and the Democratic Party fought against many of the new state laws. Former President  Bill Clinton  denounced them, saying, "There has never been in my lifetime, since we got rid of the  poll tax  and all the  Jim Crow burdens  on voting, the determined effort to limit the franchise that we see today". He was referring to Jim Crow laws passed in southern states near the turn of the twentieth century that  disenfranchised  most blacks from voting and excluded them from the political process for more than six decades. Clinton said the moves would effectively disenfranchise core voter blocs that trend liberal, including college students, Blacks, and Latinos.  Rolling Stone  magazine criticized the  American Legislative Exchange Council  (ALEC) for lobbying in states to bring about these laws, to "solve" a problem that does not exist. The Obama campaign fought against the Ohio law, pushing for a petition and statewide referendum to repeal it in time for the 2012 election. In addition, the  Pennsylvania  legislature proposed a plan to change its representation in the electoral college from the traditional winner-take-all model to a district-by-district model. As the governorship and both houses of its legislature were Republican-controlled, the move was viewed by some as an attempt to reduce Democratic chances.

With an incumbent president running for re-election against token opposition, the race for the Democratic nomination was largely uneventful. The nomination process consisted of  primaries and caucuses , held by the 50 states, as well as  Guam ,  Puerto Rico ,  [Washington, D. C.](Washington, D. C.) ,  [U. S. Virgin Islands](U. S. Virgin Islands) ,  American Samoa , and  Democrats Abroad . Additionally, high-ranking party members known as  superdelegate s each received one vote in the convention. A few of the primary challengers surpassed the president's vote total in individual counties in several of the seven contested primaries, though none made a significant impact in the delegate count. Running unopposed everywhere else, President Obama cemented his status as the Democratic  presumptive nominee  on April 3, 2012, by securing the minimum number of pledged delegates needed to obtain the nomination.

Candidates with considerable name recognition who entered the race for the Republican presidential nomination in the early stages of the primary campaign included  Representative  and former Libertarian nominee  Ron Paul , former Minnesota Governor  Tim Pawlenty , who co-chaired  John McCain's campaign in 2008 , former Massachusetts Governor  Mitt Romney , the runner-up for the nomination in the 2008 cycle, and former  Speaker of the House   Newt Gingrich . The first debate took place on May 5, 2011, in  Greenville, South Carolina , with businessman  Herman Cain , former New Mexico Governor  Gary Johnson ,  Ron Paul ,  Tim Pawlenty , and former Pennsylvania Senator  Rick Santorum  participating. Another debate took place a month later, with  Newt Gingrich ,  Mitt Romney , former Utah Governor  Jon Huntsman , and Rep.  Michele Bachmann  participating, and Gary Johnson excluded. A total of thirteen debates were held before the Iowa caucuses. The first major event of the campaign was the  Ames Straw Poll , which took place in Iowa on August 13, 2011. Michele Bachmann won the straw poll (this ultimately proved to be the acme of her campaign). Pawlenty withdrew from the race after a poor showing in the straw poll, as did  Thaddeus McCotter , the only candidate among those who qualified for the ballot who was refused entrance into the debate. It became clear at around this point in the nomination process that while Romney was considered to be the likely nominee by the Republican establishment, a large segment of the  conservative  primary electorate found him to be too  moderate  for their political views. As a result, a number of potential "anti-Romney" candidates were put forward, including  Donald Trump ,  Sarah Palin ,  Chris Christie , and Texas Governor  Rick Perry , the last of whom decided to run in August 2011. Perry did poorly in the debates, however, and  Herman Cain  and then  Newt Gingrich  came into the fore in October and November. Due to a number of scandals, Cain withdrew just before the end of the year, after having gotten on the ballot in several states. Around the same time, Johnson, who had been able to get into only one other debate, withdrew to seek the  Libertarian Party  nomination. For the first time in modern  Republican Party  history, three different candidates won the first three state contests in January (the Iowa caucuses, the New Hampshire primary, and the South Carolina primary). Although Romney had been expected to win in at least Iowa and New Hampshire, Rick Santorum won the non-binding poll at caucus sites in Iowa by 34 votes, as near as can be determined from the incomplete tally, earning him a declaration as winner by state party leaders, although vote totals were missing from eight precincts. The election of county delegates at the caucuses would eventually lead to Ron Paul earning 22 of the 28 Iowa delegates to the Republican National Convention.  Newt Gingrich  won South Carolina by a surprisingly large margin, and Romney won only in New Hampshire. Those who understood the dynamics of the Iowa caucus process realized after the Iowa caucuses that Paul could dominate the delegate selection process at the Iowa Republican Convention, but national media significantly underestimated Paul's delegate count during the first half of 2012. The New York Times and the Associated Press projected until the Iowa Republican convention in June that Paul would only get one Iowa delegate at the national convention. An accurate delegate projection would have had Paul in the lead after the January 3 Iowa caucuses and after the January 10 New Hampshire primary, where Romney earned 8 delegates, Paul earned 3 delegates and Jon Huntsman earned 1 delegate. A number of candidates dropped out at this point in the nomination process. Bachmann withdrew after finishing sixth in the Iowa caucuses, Huntsman withdrew after coming in third in New Hampshire, and Perry withdrew when polls showed him drawing low numbers in South Carolina. Santorum, who had previously run an essentially one-state campaign in Iowa, was able to organize a national campaign after his surprising victory there. He unexpectedly carried three states in a row on February 7 and overtook Romney in nationwide opinion polls, becoming the only candidate in the race to effectively challenge the notion that Romney was the inevitable nominee. However, Romney won all of the other contests between South Carolina and the  Super Tuesday primaries , and regained his first-place status in nationwide opinion polls by the end of February. The  Super Tuesday primaries  took place on March 6. Romney carried six states, Santorum carried three, and Gingrich won only in his home state of Georgia. Throughout the rest of March, 266 delegates were allocated in 12 events, including the territorial contests and the first local conventions that allocated delegates (Wyoming's county conventions). Santorum won Kansas and three Southern primaries, but he was unable to make any substantial gain on Romney, who became a formidable frontrunner after securing more than half of the delegates allocated in March. On April 10, Santorum suspended his campaign due to a variety of reasons, such as a low delegate count, unfavorable polls in his home state of Pennsylvania, and his daughter's health, leaving Mitt Romney as the undisputed front-runner for the presidential nomination and allowing Gingrich to claim that he was "the last conservative standing" in the campaign for the nomination. After disappointing results in the April 24 primaries (finishing second in one state, third in three, and fourth in one), Gingrich dropped out on May 2 in a move that was seen as an effective end to the nomination contest. After Gingrich's spokesman announced his upcoming withdrawal, the  Republican National Committee  declared Romney the party's  presumptive nominee . Ron Paul officially remained in the race, but he stopped campaigning on May 14 to focus on state conventions. On May 29, after winning the Texas primary, Romney had received a sufficient number of delegates to clinch the party's nomination with the inclusion of unpledged delegates. After winning the June 5 primaries in California and several other states, Romney had received more than enough pledged delegates to clinch the nomination without counting unpledged delegates, making the June 26 Utah Primary, the last contest of the cycle, purely symbolic. CNN's final delegate estimate, released on July 27, 2012, put Romney at 1,462 pledged delegates and 62 unpledged delegates, for a total estimate of 1,524 delegates. No other candidate had unpledged delegates. The delegate estimates for the other candidates were Santorum at 261 delegates, Paul at 154, Gingrich at 142, Bachmann at 1, Huntsman at 1, and all others at 0. On August 28, 2012, delegates at the  Republican National Convention  officially named Romney the party's presidential nominee. Romney formally accepted the delegates' nomination on August 30, 2012.

Four other parties nominated candidates that had ballot access or  write-in  access to at least 270 electoral votes, the minimum number of votes needed in the 2012 election to win the presidency through a majority of the electoral college.

Candidates in bold were on ballots representing 270 electoral votes. All other candidates were on the ballots of fewer than 10 states, 100 electors, and less than 20% of voters nationwide.

The United States presidential election of 2012 broke new records in financing, fundraising, and  negative campaigning . Through  grassroots  campaign contributions, online donations, and  Super PACs , Obama and Romney raised a combined total of more than $2 billion. Super PACs constituted nearly one-fourth of the total financing, with most coming from pro-Romney PACs. Obama raised $690 million through online channels, beating his record of $500 million in 2008. Most of the advertising in the 2012 presidential campaign was decidedly negative—80% of Obama's ads and 84% of Romney's ads were negative. The tax-exempt non-profit  Americans for Prosperity , a so-called "outside group", that is, a political advocacy group that is not a  political action committee  or super-PAC, ran a television advertising campaign opposing Obama described by  The Washington Post  as "early and relentless". Americans for Prosperity spent $8.4 million in  swing state s on television advertisements denouncing the  American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009  loan guarantee to  Solyndra , a manufacturer of solar panels that went bankrupt, an advertising campaign described by  The Wall Street Journal  in November 2011 as "perhaps the biggest attack on Mr. Obama so far".

Map of United States showing Charlotte, Tampa, Nashville, Las Vegas, Los Angeles and Baltimore 

The  Commission on Presidential Debates  held four debates during the last weeks of the campaign: three presidential and one vice-presidential. The major issues debated were the economy and jobs, the federal budget deficit, taxation and spending, the future of  Social Security ,  Medicare , and  Medicaid ,  healthcare reform , education, social issues, immigration, and foreign policy. Debate schedule:An independent presidential debate featuring minor party candidates took place on Tuesday, October 23 at the  Hilton Hotel  in  Chicago , Illinois. The debate was moderated by  Larry King  and organized by the  Free & Equal Elections Foundation . The participants were  Gary Johnson  ( Libertarian ),  Jill Stein  ( Green ),  Virgil Goode  ( Constitution ), and  Rocky Anderson  ( Justice ).  A second debate between Stein and Johnson took place on Monday, November 5 in Washington, D. C. It was hosted by  RT  and moderated by  Thom Hartmann  and  Christina Tobin .

Popular vote totals are from the official Federal Election Commission report. The results of the electoral vote were certified by Congress on January 4, 2013.

The table below displays the official vote tallies by each state's Electoral College voting method. The source for the results of all states, except those that amended their official results, is the official Federal Election Commission report. The column labeled "Margin" shows Obama's margin of victory over Romney (the margin is negative for every state that Romney won).'Electoral methods'Two states (Maine and Nebraska) allow for their electoral votes to be split between candidates. The winner within each congressional district gets one electoral vote for the district. The winner of the statewide vote gets two additional electoral votes.

 denotes states (or congressional districts that contribute an electoral vote) won by Republican Mitt Romney;  denotes those won by Democrat Barack Obama. State where the margin of victory was under 1% (29 electoral votes):States where the margin of victory was under 5% (46 electoral votes):States/districts where the margin of victory was between 5% and 10% (119 electoral votes):

After the networks called Ohio (the state that was arguably the most critical for Romney, as no Republican has ever won the Presidency without carrying it) for Obama at around 11:15 PM  EST  on Election Day, Romney was ready to concede the race, but hesitated when  Karl Rove  strenuously objected on Fox News to the network's decision to make that call. However, after Colorado and Nevada were called for the President (giving Obama enough electoral votes to win even if Ohio were to leave his column), in tandem with Obama's apparent lead in Florida and Virginia (both were eventually called for Obama), Romney acknowledged that he had lost and conceded at around 1:00 AM  EST  on November 7. Despite public polling showing Romney behind Obama in the swing states of Nevada, Colorado, Iowa, Wisconsin, Ohio, and New Hampshire, tied with Obama in Virginia, and just barely ahead of Obama in Florida, the Romney campaign said they were genuinely surprised by the loss, having believed that public polling was oversampling Democrats. The Romney campaign had already set up a transition website, and had scheduled and purchased a fireworks display to celebrate in case he won the election. On November 30, 2012, it was revealed that shortly before the election, internal polling done by the Romney campaign had shown Romney ahead in Colorado and New Hampshire, tied in Iowa, and within a few points of Obama in Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, Minnesota, and Ohio. In addition, the Romney campaign had assumed that they would win Florida, North Carolina, and Virginia. The polls had made Romney and his campaign team so confident of their victory that Romney did not write a  concession speech  until Obama's victory was announced.

Foreign leaders reacted with both positive and mixed messages. Most world leaders congratulated and praised Barack Obama on his re-election victory. However, Venezuela and some other states had tempered reactions. Pakistan commented that Romney's defeat had made  Pakistan-United States relations  safer. Stock markets fell noticeably after Obama's re-election, with the  Dow Jones Industrial Average ,  NASDAQ , and the  S&P 500  each declining over two percent the day after the election. By his inauguration, however, the markets had gained back all the losses and a bull run began that culminated in 2015 when the Dow closed at an all-time high of 18,312, the NASDAQ reached the milestone of 5,210, and the S&P 500 peaked at a record 2,130.

The United States  has a population of 50 million  Hispanic and Latino Americans , 27 million of whom are citizens eligible to vote (13% of total eligible voters). Traditionally, only half of eligible Hispanic voters vote (around 7% of voters); of them, 71% voted for Barack Obama (increasing his  percentage  of the vote by 5%; therefore, the Hispanic vote was an important factor in Obama's re-election, since the vote difference between the two main parties was only 3.9%'Source:' Exit polls conducted by Edison Research of  Somerville, New Jersey , for the National Election Pool, a consortium of ABC News, Associated Press, CBS News, CNN, Fox News, and NBC News. Total vote and results by region are based on the  "Votes by state"  section of this article.

Combined with the re-elections of  Bill Clinton  and  George W. Bush , Obama's victory in the 2012 election marked only the second time in American history that three consecutive presidents were each elected to two or more full terms (the first time being the consecutive two-term presidencies of  Thomas Jefferson ,  James Madison , and  James Monroe ). This was also the first election since  1944  in which neither of the major candidates had any military experience. The 2012 election marked the first time since  Franklin D. Roosevelt 's last two re-elections in  1940  and  1944  that a Democratic presidential candidate won a majority of the popular vote in two consecutive elections. Obama was also the first president of either party to secure at least 51% of the popular vote in two elections since  Dwight Eisenhower  in 1952 and 1956. Obama is the third Democratic president to secure at least 51% of the vote twice, after  Andrew Jackson  and Franklin D. Roosevelt. Romney lost his home state of  Massachusetts , becoming the first major party presidential candidate to lose his home state since Democrat  Al Gore  lost his home state of  Tennessee  to Republican George W. Bush in the  2000 election . Romney lost his home state by more than 23%, the worst losing margin for a major party candidate since  John Frémont  in  1856 . Even worse than Frémont, Romney failed to win a single county in his home state. In addition, since Obama carried Ryan's home state of  Wisconsin , the Romney–Ryan ticket was the first major party ticket since the  1972 election  to have both of its nominees lose their home states. Romney won the popular vote in every  county  of three states: Utah, Oklahoma, and West Virginia; Obama did so in four states: Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Hawaii. Romney's loss prompted the  Republican National Committee  to try to appeal to the American Latino population by concentrating on different approaches to immigration.  These were short-lived due to activity and anger from the Republican base and may have contributed to the selection of  Donald Trump  as their presidential candidate four years later. Gary Johnson 's popular vote total set a  Libertarian Party  record, and his popular vote percentage is the second-best showing for a Libertarian in a presidential election, trailing only  Ed Clark 's in  1980 .  Green Party  candidate  Jill Stein 's popular vote total made her the  [most successful female presidential candidate](List of female United States presidential and vice-presidential candidates)  in a general election in United States history. Obama's vote total was the second most votes received in the history of presidential elections and the most ever for a reelected president. Obama owns the all-time record for votes in a single election as well in 2008. However, Obama also became the first president in American history to be reelected to a second term by smaller margins in every way possible: Compared to his victory in 2008, he won fewer states (28 to 26), fewer electoral votes (365 to 332), fewer popular votes (69.5 million to 65.9 million), and a smaller percentage of the popular vote (52.9% to 51.1%).